## Automatic Semicolons

ASI (Automatic Semicolon Insertion) is when JavaScript assumes a `;` in certain places in your JS program even if you didn't put one there.

Why would it do that? Because if you omit even a single required `;` your program would fail. Not very forgiving. ASI allows JS to be tolerant of certain places where `;` aren't commonly thought  to be necessary.

It's important to note that ASI will only take effect in the presence of a newline (aka line break). Semicolons are not inserted in the middle of a line.

Basically, if the JS parser parses a line where a parser error would occur (a missing expected `;`), and it can reasonably insert one, it does so. What's reasonable for insertion? Only if there's nothing but whitespace and/or comments between the end of some statement and that line's newline/line break.

Consider:

```js
var a = 42, b
c;
```

Should JS treat the `c` on the next line as part of the `var` statement? It certainly would if a `,` had come anywhere (even another line) between `b` and `c`. But since there isn't one, JS assumes instead that there's an implied `;` (at the newline) after `b`. Thus, `c;` is left as a standalone expression statement.

Similarly:

```js
var a = 42, b = "foo";

a
b	// "foo"
```

That's still a valid program without error, because expression statements also accept ASI.

There's certain places where ASI is helpful, like for instance:

```js
var a = 42;

do {
	// ..
} while (a)	// <-- ; expected here!
a;
```

The grammar requires a `;` after a `do..while` loop, but not after `while` or `for` loops. But most developers don't remember that! So, ASI helpfully steps in and inserts one.

As we said earlier in the chapter, statement blocks do not require `;` termination, so ASI isn't necessary:

```js
var a = 42;

while (a) {
	// ..
} // <-- no ; expected here
a;
```

The other major case where ASI kicks in is with the `break`, `continue`, `return`, and (ES6) `yield` keywords:

```js
function foo(a) {
	if (!a) return
	a *= 2;
	// ..
}
```

The `return` statement doesn't carry across the newline to the `a *= 2` expression, as ASI assumes the `;` terminating the `return` statement. Of course, `return` statements *can* easily break across multiple lines, just not when there's nothing after `return` but the newline/line break.

```js
function foo(a) {
	return (
		a * 2 + 3 / 12
	);
}
```

Identical reasoning applies to `break`, `continue`, and `yield`.

### Error Correction

One of the most hotly contested *religious wars* in the JS community (besides tabs vs. spaces) is whether to rely heavily/exclusively on ASI or not.

Most, but not all, semicolons are optional, but the two `;`s in the `for ( .. ) ..` loop header are required.

On the pro side of this debate, many developers believe that ASI is a useful mechanism that allows them to write more terse (and more "beautiful") code by omitting all but the strictly required `;`s (which are very few). It is often asserted that ASI makes many `;`s optional, so a correctly written program *without them* is no different than a correctly written program *with them*.

On the con side of the debate, many other developers will assert that there are *too many* places that can be accidental gotchas, especially for newer, less experienced developers, where unintended `;`s being magically inserted change the meaning. Similarly, some developers will argue that if they omit a semicolon, it's a flat-out mistake, and they want their tools (linters, etc.) to catch it before the JS engine *corrects* the mistake under the covers.

Let me just share my perspective. A strict reading of the spec implies that ASI is an "error correction" routine. What kind of error, you may ask? Specifically, a **parser error**. In other words, in an attempt to have the parser fail less, ASI lets it be more tolerant.

But tolerant of what? In my view, the only way a **parser error** occurs is if it's given an incorrect/errored program to parse. So, while ASI is strictly correcting parser errors, the only way it can get such errors is if there were first program authoring errors -- omitting semicolons where the grammar rules require them.

So, to put it more bluntly, when I hear someone claim that they want to omit "optional semicolons," my brain translates that claim to "I want to write the most parser-broken program I can that will still work."

I find that to be a ludicrous position to take and the arguments of saving keystrokes and having more "beautiful code" to be weak at best.

Furthermore, I don't agree that this is the same thing as the spaces vs tabs debate -- that it's purely cosmetic -- but rather I believe it's a fundamental question of writing code that adheres to grammar requirements vs. code that relies on grammar exceptions to just barely skate through.

Another way of looking at it is that relying on ASI is essentially considering newlines to be significant "whitespace." Other languages like Python have true significant whitespace. But is it really appropriate to think of JavaScript as having significant newlines as it stands today?

My take: **use semicolons wherever you know they are "required," and limit your assumptions about ASI to a minimum.**

But don't just take my word for it. Back in 2012, creator of JavaScript Brendan Eich said (http://brendaneich.com/2012/04/the-infernal-semicolon/) the following:

> The moral of this story: ASI is (formally speaking) a syntactic error correction procedure. If you start to code as if it were a universal significant-newline rule, you will get into trouble.
> ..
> I wish I had made newlines more significant in JS back in those ten days in May, 1995.
> ..
> Be careful not to use ASI as if it gave JS significant newlines.

## Errors

Not only does JavaScript have different *subtypes* of errors (`TypeError`, `ReferenceError`, `SyntaxError`, etc.), but also the grammar defines certain errors to be enforced at compile time, as compared to all other errors that happen during runtime.

In particular, there have long been a number of specific conditions that should be caught and reported as "early errors" (during compilation). Any straight-up syntax error is an early error (e.g., `a = ,`), but also the grammar defines things that are syntactically valid but disallowed nonetheless.

Since execution of your code has not begun yet, these errors are not catchable with `try..catch`; they will just fail the parsing/compilation of your program.

**Tip:** There's no requirement in the spec about exactly how browsers (and developer tools) should report errors. So you may see variations across browsers in the following error examples, in what specific subtype of error is reported or what the included error message text will be.

One simple example is with syntax inside a regular expression literal. There's nothing wrong with the JS syntax here, but the invalid regex will throw an early error:

```js
var a = /+foo/;		// Error!
```

The target of an assignment must be an identifier (or an ES6 destructuring expression that produces one or more identifiers), so a value like `42` in that position is illegal and can be reported right away:

```js
var a;
42 = a;		// Error!
```

ES5's `strict` mode defines even more early errors. For example, in `strict` mode, function parameter names cannot be duplicated:

```js
function foo(a,b,a) { }					// just fine

function bar(a,b,a) { "use strict"; }	// Error!
```

Another `strict` mode early error is an object literal having more than one property of the same name:

```js
(function(){
	"use strict";

	var a = {
		b: 42,
		b: 43
	};			// Error!
})();
```

**Note:** Semantically speaking, such errors aren't technically *syntax* errors but more *grammar* errors -- the above snippets are syntactically valid. But since there is no `GrammarError` type, some browsers use `SyntaxError` instead.

### Using Variables Too Early

ES6 defines a (frankly confusingly named) new concept called the TDZ ("Temporal Dead Zone").

The TDZ refers to places in code where a variable reference cannot yet be made, because it hasn't reached its required initialization.

The most clear example of this is with ES6 `let` block-scoping:

```js
{
	a = 2;		// ReferenceError!
	let a;
}
```

The assignment `a = 2` is accessing the `a` variable (which is indeed block-scoped to the `{ .. }` block) before it's been initialized by the `let a` declaration, so it's in the TDZ for `a` and throws an error.

Interestingly, while `typeof` has an exception to be safe for undeclared variables (see Chapter 1), no such safety exception is made for TDZ references:

```js
{
	typeof a;	// undefined
	typeof b;	// ReferenceError! (TDZ)
	let b;
}
```

## Function Arguments

Another example of a TDZ violation can be seen with ES6 default parameter values (see the *ES6 & Beyond* title of this series):

```js
var b = 3;

function foo( a = 42, b = a + b + 5 ) {
	// ..
}
```

The `b` reference in the assignment would happen in the TDZ for the parameter `b` (not pull in the outer `b` reference), so it will throw an error. However, the `a` in the assignment is fine since by that time it's past the TDZ for parameter `a`.

When using ES6's default parameter values, the default value is applied to the parameter if you either omit an argument, or you pass an `undefined` value in its place:

```js
function foo( a = 42, b = a + 1 ) {
	console.log( a, b );
}

foo();					// 42 43
foo( undefined );		// 42 43
foo( 5 );				// 5 6
foo( void 0, 7 );		// 42 7
foo( null );			// null 1
```

**Note:** `null` is coerced to a `0` value in the `a + 1` expression. See Chapter 4 for more info.

From the ES6 default parameter values perspective, there's no difference between omitting an argument and passing an `undefined` value. However, there is a way to detect the difference in some cases:

```js
function foo( a = 42, b = a + 1 ) {
	console.log(
		arguments.length, a, b,
		arguments[0], arguments[1]
	);
}

foo();					// 0 42 43 undefined undefined
foo( 10 );				// 1 10 11 10 undefined
foo( 10, undefined );	// 2 10 11 10 undefined
foo( 10, null );		// 2 10 null 10 null
```

Even though the default parameter values are applied to the `a` and `b` parameters, if no arguments were passed in those slots, the `arguments` array will not have entries.

Conversely, if you pass an `undefined` argument explicitly, an entry will exist in the `arguments` array for that argument, but it will be `undefined` and not (necessarily) the same as the default value that was applied to the named parameter for that same slot.

While ES6 default parameter values can create divergence between the `arguments` array slot and the corresponding named parameter variable, this same disjointedness can also occur in tricky ways in ES5:

```js
function foo(a) {
	a = 42;
	console.log( arguments[0] );
}

foo( 2 );	// 42 (linked)
foo();		// undefined (not linked)
```

If you pass an argument, the `arguments` slot and the named parameter are linked to always have the same value. If you omit the argument, no such linkage occurs.

But in `strict` mode, the linkage doesn't exist regardless:

```js
function foo(a) {
	"use strict";
	a = 42;
	console.log( arguments[0] );
}

foo( 2 );	// 2 (not linked)
foo();		// undefined (not linked)
```

It's almost certainly a bad idea to ever rely on any such linkage, and in fact the linkage itself is a leaky abstraction that's exposing an underlying implementation detail of the engine, rather than a properly designed feature.

Use of the `arguments` array has been deprecated (especially in favor of ES6 `...` rest parameters -- see the *ES6 & Beyond* title of this series), but that doesn't mean that it's all bad.

Prior to ES6, `arguments` is the only way to get an array of all passed arguments to pass along to other functions, which turns out to be quite useful. You can also mix named parameters with the `arguments` array and be safe, as long as you follow one simple rule: **never refer to a named parameter *and* its corresponding `arguments` slot at the same time.** If you avoid that bad practice, you'll never expose the leaky linkage behavior.

```js
function foo(a) {
	console.log( a + arguments[1] ); // safe!
}

foo( 10, 32 );	// 42
```

## `try..finally`

You're probably familiar with how the `try..catch` block works. But have you ever stopped to consider the `finally` clause that can be paired with it? In fact, were you aware that `try` only requires either `catch` or `finally`, though both can be present if needed.

The code in the `finally` clause *always* runs (no matter what), and it always runs right after the `try` (and `catch` if present) finish, before any other code runs. In one sense, you can kind of think of the code in a `finally` clause as being in a callback function that will always be called regardless of how the rest of the block behaves.

So what happens if there's a `return` statement inside a `try` clause? It obviously will return a value, right? But does the calling code that receives that value run before or after the `finally`?

```js
function foo() {
	try {
		return 42;
	}
	finally {
		console.log( "Hello" );
	}

	console.log( "never runs" );
}

console.log( foo() );
// Hello
// 42
```

The `return 42` runs right away, which sets up the completion value from the `foo()` call. This action completes the `try` clause and the `finally` clause immediately runs next. Only then is the `foo()` function complete, so that its completion value is returned back for the `console.log(..)` statement to use.

The exact same behavior is true of a `throw` inside `try`:

```js
 function foo() {
	try {
		throw 42;
	}
	finally {
		console.log( "Hello" );
	}

	console.log( "never runs" );
}

console.log( foo() );
// Hello
// Uncaught Exception: 42
```

Now, if an exception is thrown (accidentally or intentionally) inside a `finally` clause, it will override as the primary completion of that function. If a previous `return` in the `try` block had set a completion value for the function, that value will be abandoned.

```js
function foo() {
	try {
		return 42;
	}
	finally {
		throw "Oops!";
	}

	console.log( "never runs" );
}

console.log( foo() );
// Uncaught Exception: Oops!
```

It shouldn't be surprising that other nonlinear control statements like `continue` and `break` exhibit similar behavior to `return` and `throw`:

```js
for (var i=0; i<10; i++) {
	try {
		continue;
	}
	finally {
		console.log( i );
	}
}
// 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
```

The `console.log(i)` statement runs at the end of the loop iteration, which is caused by the `continue` statement. However, it still runs before the `i++` iteration update statement, which is why the values printed are `0..9` instead of `1..10`.

**Note:** ES6 adds a `yield` statement, in generators (see the *Async & Performance* title of this series) which in some ways can be seen as an intermediate `return` statement. However, unlike a `return`, a `yield` isn't complete until the generator is resumed, which means a `try { .. yield .. }` has not completed. So an attached `finally` clause will not run right after the `yield` like it does with `return`.

A `return` inside a `finally` has the special ability to override a previous `return` from the `try` or `catch` clause, but only if `return` is explicitly called:

```js
function foo() {
	try {
		return 42;
	}
	finally {
		// no `return ..` here, so no override
	}
}

function bar() {
	try {
		return 42;
	}
	finally {
		// override previous `return 42`
		return;
	}
}

function baz() {
	try {
		return 42;
	}
	finally {
		// override previous `return 42`
		return "Hello";
	}
}

foo();	// 42
bar();	// undefined
baz();	// "Hello"
```

Normally, the omission of `return` in a function is the same as `return;` or even `return undefined;`, but inside a `finally` block the omission of `return` does not act like an overriding `return undefined`; it just lets the previous `return` stand.

In fact, we can really up the craziness if we combine `finally` with labeled `break` (discussed earlier in the chapter):

```js
function foo() {
	bar: {
		try {
			return 42;
		}
		finally {
			// break out of `bar` labeled block
			break bar;
		}
	}

	console.log( "Crazy" );

	return "Hello";
}

console.log( foo() );
// Crazy
// Hello
```

But... don't do this. Seriously. Using a `finally` + labeled `break` to effectively cancel a `return` is doing your best to create the most confusing code possible. I'd wager no amount of comments will redeem this code.

## `switch`

Let's briefly explore the `switch` statement, a sort-of syntactic shorthand for an `if..else if..else..` statement chain.

```js
switch (a) {
	case 2:
		// do something
		break;
	case 42:
		// do another thing
		break;
	default:
		// fallback to here
}
```

As you can see, it evaluates `a` once, then matches the resulting value to each `case` expression (just simple value expressions here). If a match is found, execution will begin in that matched `case`, and will either go until a `break` is encountered or until the end of the `switch` block is found.

That much may not surprise you, but there are several quirks about `switch` you may not have noticed before.

First, the matching that occurs between the `a` expression and each `case` expression is identical to the `===` algorithm (see Chapter 4). Often times `switch`es are used with absolute values in `case` statements, as shown above, so strict matching is appropriate.

However, you may wish to allow coercive equality (aka `==`, see Chapter 4), and to do so you'll need to sort of "hack" the `switch` statement a bit:

```js
var a = "42";

switch (true) {
	case a == 10:
		console.log( "10 or '10'" );
		break;
	case a == 42:
		console.log( "42 or '42'" );
		break;
	default:
		// never gets here
}
// 42 or '42'
```

This works because the `case` clause can have any expression (not just simple values), which means it will strictly match that expression's result to the test expression (`true`). Since `a == 42` results in `true` here, the match is made.

Despite `==`, the `switch` matching itself is still strict, between `true` and `true` here. If the `case` expression resulted in something that was truthy but not strictly `true` (see Chapter 4), it wouldn't work. This can bite you if you're for instance using a "logical operator" like `||` or `&&` in your expression:

```js
var a = "hello world";
var b = 10;

switch (true) {
	case (a || b == 10):
		// never gets here
		break;
	default:
		console.log( "Oops" );
}
// Oops
```

Since the result of `(a || b == 10)` is `"hello world"` and not `true`, the strict match fails. In this case, the fix is to force the expression explicitly to be a `true` or `false`, such as `case !!(a || b == 10):` (see Chapter 4).

Lastly, the `default` clause is optional, and it doesn't necessarily have to come at the end (although that's the strong convention). Even in the `default` clause, the same rules apply about encountering a `break` or not:

```js
var a = 10;

switch (a) {
	case 1:
	case 2:
		// never gets here
	default:
		console.log( "default" );
	case 3:
		console.log( "3" );
		break;
	case 4:
		console.log( "4" );
}
// default
// 3
```

**Note:** As discussed previously about labeled `break`s, the `break` inside a `case` clause can also be labeled.

The way this snippet processes is that it passes through all the `case` clause matching first, finds no match, then goes back up to the `default` clause and starts executing. Since there's no `break` there, it continues executing in the already skipped over `case 3` block, before stopping once it hits that `break`.

While this sort of round-about logic is clearly possible in JavaScript, there's almost no chance that it's going to make for reasonable or understandable code. Be very skeptical if you find yourself wanting to create such circular logic flow, and if you really do, make sure you include plenty of code comments to explain what you're up to!

## Review

JavaScript grammar has plenty of nuance that we as developers should spend a little more time paying closer attention to than we typically do. A little bit of effort goes a long way to solidifying your deeper knowledge of the language.

Statements and expressions have analogs in English language -- statements are like sentences and expressions are like phrases. Expressions can be pure/self-contained, or they can have side effects.

The JavaScript grammar layers semantic usage rules (aka context) on top of the pure syntax. For example, `{ }` pairs used in various places in your program can mean statement blocks, `object` literals, (ES6) destructuring assignments, or (ES6) named function arguments.

JavaScript operators all have well-defined rules for precedence (which ones bind first before others) and associativity (how multiple operator expressions are implicitly grouped). Once you learn these rules, it's up to you to decide if precedence/associativity are *too implicit* for their own good, or if they will aid in writing shorter, clearer code.

ASI (Automatic Semicolon Insertion) is a parser-error-correction mechanism built into the JS engine, which allows it under certain circumstances to insert an assumed `;` in places where it is required, was omitted, *and* where insertion fixes the parser error. The debate rages over whether this behavior implies that most `;` are optional (and can/should be omitted for cleaner code) or whether it means that omitting them is making mistakes that the JS engine merely cleans up for you.

JavaScript has several types of errors, but it's less known that it has two classifications for errors: "early" (compiler thrown, uncatchable) and "runtime" (`try..catch`able). All syntax errors are obviously early errors that stop the program before it runs, but there are others, too.

Function arguments have an interesting relationship to their formal declared named parameters. Specifically, the `arguments` array has a number of gotchas of leaky abstraction behavior if you're not careful. Avoid `arguments` if you can, but if you must use it, by all means avoid using the positional slot in `arguments` at the same time as using a named parameter for that same argument.

The `finally` clause attached to a `try` (or `try..catch`) offers some very interesting quirks in terms of execution processing order. Some of these quirks can be helpful, but it's possible to create lots of confusion, especially if combined with labeled blocks. As always, use `finally` to make code better and clearer, not more clever or confusing.

The `switch` offers some nice shorthand for `if..else if..` statements, but beware of many common simplifying assumptions about its behavior. There are several quirks that can trip you up if you're not careful, but there's also some neat hidden tricks that `switch` has up its sleeve!
