## Chain Flow

We've hinted at this a couple of times already, but Promises are not just a mechanism for a single-step *this-then-that* sort of operation. That's the building block, of course, but it turns out we can string multiple Promises together to represent a sequence of async steps.

The key to making this work is built on two behaviors intrinsic to Promises:

* Every time you call `then(..)` on a Promise, it creates and returns a new Promise, which we can *chain* with.
* Whatever value you return from the `then(..)` call's fulfillment callback (the first parameter) is automatically set as the fulfillment of the *chained* Promise (from the first point).

Let's first illustrate what that means, and *then* we'll derive how that helps us create async sequences of flow control. Consider the following:

```js
var p = Promise.resolve( 21 );

var p2 = p.then( function(v){
	console.log( v );	// 21

	// fulfill `p2` with value `42`
	return v * 2;
} );

// chain off `p2`
p2.then( function(v){
	console.log( v );	// 42
} );
```

By returning `v * 2` (i.e., `42`), we fulfill the `p2` promise that the first `then(..)` call created and returned. When `p2`'s `then(..)` call runs, it's receiving the fulfillment from the `return v * 2` statement. Of course, `p2.then(..)` creates yet another promise, which we could have stored in a `p3` variable.

But it's a little annoying to have to create an intermediate variable `p2` (or `p3`, etc.). Thankfully, we can easily just chain these together:

```js
var p = Promise.resolve( 21 );

p
.then( function(v){
	console.log( v );	// 21

	// fulfill the chained promise with value `42`
	return v * 2;
} )
// here's the chained promise
.then( function(v){
	console.log( v );	// 42
} );
```

So now the first `then(..)` is the first step in an async sequence, and the second `then(..)` is the second step. This could keep going for as long as you needed it to extend. Just keep chaining off a previous `then(..)` with each automatically created Promise.

But there's something missing here. What if we want step 2 to wait for step 1 to do something asynchronous? We're using an immediate `return` statement, which immediately fulfills the chained promise.

The key to making a Promise sequence truly async capable at every step is to recall how `Promise.resolve(..)` operates when what you pass to it is a Promise or thenable instead of a final value. `Promise.resolve(..)` directly returns a received genuine Promise, or it unwraps the value of a received thenable -- and keeps going recursively while it keeps unwrapping thenables.

The same sort of unwrapping happens if you `return` a thenable or Promise from the fulfillment (or rejection) handler. Consider:

```js
var p = Promise.resolve( 21 );

p.then( function(v){
	console.log( v );	// 21

	// create a promise and return it
	return new Promise( function(resolve,reject){
		// fulfill with value `42`
		resolve( v * 2 );
	} );
} )
.then( function(v){
	console.log( v );	// 42
} );
```

Even though we wrapped `42` up in a promise that we returned, it still got unwrapped and ended up as the resolution of the chained promise, such that the second `then(..)` still received `42`. If we introduce asynchrony to that wrapping promise, everything still nicely works the same:

```js
var p = Promise.resolve( 21 );

p.then( function(v){
	console.log( v );	// 21

	// create a promise to return
	return new Promise( function(resolve,reject){
		// introduce asynchrony!
		setTimeout( function(){
			// fulfill with value `42`
			resolve( v * 2 );
		}, 100 );
	} );
} )
.then( function(v){
	// runs after the 100ms delay in the previous step
	console.log( v );	// 42
} );
```

That's incredibly powerful! Now we can construct a sequence of however many async steps we want, and each step can delay the next step (or not!), as necessary.

Of course, the value passing from step to step in these examples is optional. If you don't return an explicit value, an implicit `undefined` is assumed, and the promises still chain together the same way. Each Promise resolution is thus just a signal to proceed to the next step.

To further the chain illustration, let's generalize a delay-Promise creation (without resolution messages) into a utility we can reuse for multiple steps:

```js
function delay(time) {
	return new Promise( function(resolve,reject){
		setTimeout( resolve, time );
	} );
}

delay( 100 ) // step 1
.then( function STEP2(){
	console.log( "step 2 (after 100ms)" );
	return delay( 200 );
} )
.then( function STEP3(){
	console.log( "step 3 (after another 200ms)" );
} )
.then( function STEP4(){
	console.log( "step 4 (next Job)" );
	return delay( 50 );
} )
.then( function STEP5(){
	console.log( "step 5 (after another 50ms)" );
} )
...
```

Calling `delay(200)` creates a promise that will fulfill in 200ms, and then we return that from the first `then(..)` fulfillment callback, which causes the second `then(..)`'s promise to wait on that 200ms promise.

**Note:** As described, technically there are two promises in that interchange: the 200ms-delay promise and the chained promise that the second `then(..)` chains from. But you may find it easier to mentally combine these two promises together, because the Promise mechanism automatically merges their states for you. In that respect, you could think of `return delay(200)` as creating a promise that replaces the earlier-returned chained promise.

To be honest, though, sequences of delays with no message passing isn't a terribly useful example of Promise flow control. Let's look at a scenario that's a little more practical.

Instead of timers, let's consider making Ajax requests:

```js
// assume an `ajax( {url}, {callback} )` utility

// Promise-aware ajax
function request(url) {
	return new Promise( function(resolve,reject){
		// the `ajax(..)` callback should be our
		// promise's `resolve(..)` function
		ajax( url, resolve );
	} );
}
```

We first define a `request(..)` utility that constructs a promise to represent the completion of the `ajax(..)` call:

```js
request( "http://some.url.1/" )
.then( function(response1){
	return request( "http://some.url.2/?v=" + response1 );
} )
.then( function(response2){
	console.log( response2 );
} );
```

**Note:** Developers commonly encounter situations in which they want to do Promise-aware async flow control with utilities that are not themselves Promise-enabled (like `ajax(..)` here, which expects a callback). Although the native ES6 `Promise` mechanism doesn't automatically solve this pattern for us, practically all Promise libraries *do*. They usually call this process "lifting" or "promisifying" or some variation thereof. We'll come back to this technique later.

Using the Promise-returning `request(..)`, we create the first step in our chain implicitly by calling it with the first URL, and chain off that returned promise with the first `then(..)`.

Once `response1` comes back, we use that value to construct a second URL, and make a second `request(..)` call. That second `request(..)` promise is `return`ed so that the third step in our async flow control waits for that Ajax call to complete. Finally, we print `response2` once it returns.

The Promise chain we construct is not only a flow control that expresses a multistep async sequence, but it also acts as a message channel to propagate messages from step to step.

What if something went wrong in one of the steps of the Promise chain? An error/exception is on a per-Promise basis, which means it's possible to catch such an error at any point in the chain, and that catching acts to sort of "reset" the chain back to normal operation at that point:

```js
// step 1:
request( "http://some.url.1/" )

// step 2:
.then( function(response1){
	foo.bar(); // undefined, error!

	// never gets here
	return request( "http://some.url.2/?v=" + response1 );
} )

// step 3:
.then(
	function fulfilled(response2){
		// never gets here
	},
	// rejection handler to catch the error
	function rejected(err){
		console.log( err );	// `TypeError` from `foo.bar()` error
		return 42;
	}
)

// step 4:
.then( function(msg){
	console.log( msg );		// 42
} );
```

When the error occurs in step 2, the rejection handler in step 3 catches it. The return value (`42` in this snippet), if any, from that rejection handler fulfills the promise for the next step (4), such that the chain is now back in a fulfillment state.

**Note:** As we discussed earlier, when returning a promise from a fulfillment handler, it's unwrapped and can delay the next step. That's also true for returning promises from rejection handlers, such that if the `return 42` in step 3 instead returned a promise, that promise could delay step 4. A thrown exception inside either the fulfillment or rejection handler of a `then(..)` call causes the next (chained) promise to be immediately rejected with that exception.

If you call `then(..)` on a promise, and you only pass a fulfillment handler to it, an assumed rejection handler is substituted:

```js
var p = new Promise( function(resolve,reject){
	reject( "Oops" );
} );

var p2 = p.then(
	function fulfilled(){
		// never gets here
	}
	// assumed rejection handler, if omitted or
	// any other non-function value passed
	// function(err) {
	//     throw err;
	// }
);
```

As you can see, the assumed rejection handler simply rethrows the error, which ends up forcing `p2` (the chained promise) to reject with the same error reason. In essence, this allows the error to continue propagating along a Promise chain until an explicitly defined rejection handler is encountered.

**Note:** We'll cover more details of error handling with Promises a little later, because there are other nuanced details to be concerned about.

If a proper valid function is not passed as the fulfillment handler parameter to `then(..)`, there's also a default handler substituted:

```js
var p = Promise.resolve( 42 );

p.then(
	// assumed fulfillment handler, if omitted or
	// any other non-function value passed
	// function(v) {
	//     return v;
	// }
	null,
	function rejected(err){
		// never gets here
	}
);
```

As you can see, the default fulfillment handler simply passes whatever value it receives along to the next step (Promise).

**Note:** The `then(null,function(err){ .. })` pattern -- only handling rejections (if any) but letting fulfillments pass through -- has a shortcut in the API: `catch(function(err){ .. })`. We'll cover `catch(..)` more fully in the next section.

Let's review briefly the intrinsic behaviors of Promises that enable chaining flow control:

* A `then(..)` call against one Promise automatically produces a new Promise to return from the call.
* Inside the fulfillment/rejection handlers, if you return a value or an exception is thrown, the new returned (chainable) Promise is resolved accordingly.
* If the fulfillment or rejection handler returns a Promise, it is unwrapped, so that whatever its resolution is will become the resolution of the chained Promise returned from the current `then(..)`.

While chaining flow control is helpful, it's probably most accurate to think of it as a side benefit of how Promises compose (combine) together, rather than the main intent. As we've discussed in detail several times already, Promises normalize asynchrony and encapsulate time-dependent value state, and *that* is what lets us chain them together in this useful way.

Certainly, the sequential expressiveness of the chain (this-then-this-then-this...) is a big improvement over the tangled mess of callbacks as we identified in Chapter 2. But there's still a fair amount of boilerplate (`then(..)` and `function(){ .. }`) to wade through. In the next chapter, we'll see a significantly nicer pattern for sequential flow control expressivity, with generators.

### Terminology: Resolve, Fulfill, and Reject

There's some slight confusion around the terms "resolve," "fulfill," and "reject" that we need to clear up, before you get too much deeper into learning about Promises. Let's first consider the `Promise(..)` constructor:

```js
var p = new Promise( function(X,Y){
	// X() for fulfillment
	// Y() for rejection
} );
```

As you can see, two callbacks (here labeled `X` and `Y`) are provided. The first is *usually* used to mark the Promise as fulfilled, and the second *always* marks the Promise as rejected. But what's the "usually" about, and what does that imply about accurately naming those parameters?

Ultimately, it's just your user code and the identifier names aren't interpreted by the engine to mean anything, so it doesn't *technically* matter; `foo(..)` and `bar(..)` are equally functional. But the words you use can affect not only how you are thinking about the code, but how other developers on your team will think about it. Thinking wrongly about carefully orchestrated async code is almost surely going to be worse than the spaghetti-callback alternatives.

So it actually does kind of matter what you call them.

The second parameter is easy to decide. Almost all literature uses `reject(..)` as its name, and because that's exactly (and only!) what it does, that's a very good choice for the name. I'd strongly recommend you always use `reject(..)`.

But there's a little more ambiguity around the first parameter, which in Promise literature is often labeled `resolve(..)`. That word is obviously related to "resolution," which is what's used across the literature (including this book) to describe setting a final value/state to a Promise. We've already used "resolve the Promise" several times to mean either fulfilling or rejecting the Promise.

But if this parameter seems to be used to specifically fulfill the Promise, why shouldn't we call it `fulfill(..)` instead of `resolve(..)` to be more accurate? To answer that question, let's also take a look at two of the `Promise` API methods:

```js
var fulfilledPr = Promise.resolve( 42 );

var rejectedPr = Promise.reject( "Oops" );
```

`Promise.resolve(..)` creates a Promise that's resolved to the value given to it. In this example, `42` is a normal, non-Promise, non-thenable value, so the fulfilled promise `fulfilledPr` is created for the value `42`. `Promise.reject("Oops")` creates the rejected promise `rejectedPr` for the reason `"Oops"`.

Let's now illustrate why the word "resolve" (such as in `Promise.resolve(..)`) is unambiguous and indeed more accurate, if used explicitly in a context that could result in either fulfillment or rejection:

```js
var rejectedTh = {
	then: function(resolved,rejected) {
		rejected( "Oops" );
	}
};

var rejectedPr = Promise.resolve( rejectedTh );
```

As we discussed earlier in this chapter, `Promise.resolve(..)` will return a received genuine Promise directly, or unwrap a received thenable. If that thenable unwrapping reveals a rejected state, the Promise returned from `Promise.resolve(..)` is in fact in that same rejected state.

So `Promise.resolve(..)` is a good, accurate name for the API method, because it can actually result in either fulfillment or rejection.

The first callback parameter of the `Promise(..)` constructor will unwrap either a thenable (identically to `Promise.resolve(..)`) or a genuine Promise:

```js
var rejectedPr = new Promise( function(resolve,reject){
	// resolve this promise with a rejected promise
	resolve( Promise.reject( "Oops" ) );
} );

rejectedPr.then(
	function fulfilled(){
		// never gets here
	},
	function rejected(err){
		console.log( err );	// "Oops"
	}
);
```

It should be clear now that `resolve(..)` is the appropriate name for the first callback parameter of the `Promise(..)` constructor.

**Warning:** The previously mentioned `reject(..)` does **not** do the unwrapping that `resolve(..)` does. If you pass a Promise/thenable value to `reject(..)`, that untouched value will be set as the rejection reason. A subsequent rejection handler would receive the actual Promise/thenable you passed to `reject(..)`, not its underlying immediate value.

But now let's turn our attention to the callbacks provided to `then(..)`. What should they be called (both in literature and in code)? I would suggest `fulfilled(..)` and `rejected(..)`:

```js
function fulfilled(msg) {
	console.log( msg );
}

function rejected(err) {
	console.error( err );
}

p.then(
	fulfilled,
	rejected
);
```

In the case of the first parameter to `then(..)`, it's unambiguously always the fulfillment case, so there's no need for the duality of "resolve" terminology. As a side note, the ES6 specification uses `onFulfilled(..)` and `onRejected(..)` to label these two callbacks, so they are accurate terms.

## Error Handling

We've already seen several examples of how Promise rejection -- either intentional through calling `reject(..)` or accidental through JS exceptions -- allows saner error handling in asynchronous programming. Let's circle back though and be explicit about some of the details that we glossed over.

The most natural form of error handling for most developers is the synchronous `try..catch` construct. Unfortunately, it's synchronous-only, so it fails to help in async code patterns:

```js
function foo() {
	setTimeout( function(){
		baz.bar();
	}, 100 );
}

try {
	foo();
	// later throws global error from `baz.bar()`
}
catch (err) {
	// never gets here
}
```

`try..catch` would certainly be nice to have, but it doesn't work across async operations. That is, unless there's some additional environmental support, which we'll come back to with generators in Chapter 4.

In callbacks, some standards have emerged for patterned error handling, most notably the "error-first callback" style:

```js
function foo(cb) {
	setTimeout( function(){
		try {
			var x = baz.bar();
			cb( null, x ); // success!
		}
		catch (err) {
			cb( err );
		}
	}, 100 );
}

foo( function(err,val){
	if (err) {
		console.error( err ); // bummer :(
	}
	else {
		console.log( val );
	}
} );
```

**Note:** The `try..catch` here works only from the perspective that the `baz.bar()` call will either succeed or fail immediately, synchronously. If `baz.bar()` was itself its own async completing function, any async errors inside it would not be catchable.

The callback we pass to `foo(..)` expects to receive a signal of an error by the reserved first parameter `err`. If present, error is assumed. If not, success is assumed.

This sort of error handling is technically *async capable*, but it doesn't compose well at all. Multiple levels of error-first callbacks woven together with these ubiquitous `if` statement checks inevitably will lead you to the perils of callback hell (see Chapter 2).

So we come back to error handling in Promises, with the rejection handler passed to `then(..)`. Promises don't use the popular "error-first callback" design style, but instead use "split callbacks" style; there's one callback for fulfillment and one for rejection:

```js
var p = Promise.reject( "Oops" );

p.then(
	function fulfilled(){
		// never gets here
	},
	function rejected(err){
		console.log( err ); // "Oops"
	}
);
```

While this pattern of error handling makes fine sense on the surface, the nuances of Promise error handling are often a fair bit more difficult to fully grasp.

Consider:

```js
var p = Promise.resolve( 42 );

p.then(
	function fulfilled(msg){
		// numbers don't have string functions,
		// so will throw an error
		console.log( msg.toLowerCase() );
	},
	function rejected(err){
		// never gets here
	}
);
```

If the `msg.toLowerCase()` legitimately throws an error (it does!), why doesn't our error handler get notified? As we explained earlier, it's because *that* error handler is for the `p` promise, which has already been fulfilled with value `42`. The `p` promise is immutable, so the only promise that can be notified of the error is the one returned from `p.then(..)`, which in this case we don't capture.

That should paint a clear picture of why error handling with Promises is error-prone (pun intended). It's far too easy to have errors swallowed, as this is very rarely what you'd intend.

**Warning:** If you use the Promise API in an invalid way and an error occurs that prevents proper Promise construction, the result will be an immediately thrown exception, **not a rejected Promise**. Some examples of incorrect usage that fail Promise construction: `new Promise(null)`, `Promise.all()`, `Promise.race(42)`, and so on. You can't get a rejected Promise if you don't use the Promise API validly enough to actually construct a Promise in the first place!

### Pit of Despair

Jeff Atwood noted years ago: programming languages are often set up in such a way that by default, developers fall into the "pit of despair" (http://blog.codinghorror.com/falling-into-the-pit-of-success/) -- where accidents are punished -- and that you have to try harder to get it right. He implored us to instead create a "pit of success," where by default you fall into expected (successful) action, and thus would have to try hard to fail.

Promise error handling is unquestionably "pit of despair" design. By default, it assumes that you want any error to be swallowed by the Promise state, and if you forget to observe that state, the error silently languishes/dies in obscurity -- usually despair.

To avoid losing an error to the silence of a forgotten/discarded Promise, some developers have claimed that a "best practice" for Promise chains is to always end your chain with a final `catch(..)`, like:

```js
var p = Promise.resolve( 42 );

p.then(
	function fulfilled(msg){
		// numbers don't have string functions,
		// so will throw an error
		console.log( msg.toLowerCase() );
	}
)
.catch( handleErrors );
```

Because we didn't pass a rejection handler to the `then(..)`, the default handler was substituted, which simply propagates the error to the next promise in the chain. As such, both errors that come into `p`, and errors that come *after* `p` in its resolution (like the `msg.toLowerCase()` one) will filter down to the final `handleErrors(..)`.

Problem solved, right? Not so fast!

What happens if `handleErrors(..)` itself also has an error in it? Who catches that? There's still yet another unattended promise: the one `catch(..)` returns, which we don't capture and don't register a rejection handler for.

You can't just stick another `catch(..)` on the end of that chain, because it too could fail. The last step in any Promise chain, whatever it is, always has the possibility, even decreasingly so, of dangling with an uncaught error stuck inside an unobserved Promise.

Sound like an impossible conundrum yet?

### Uncaught Handling

It's not exactly an easy problem to solve completely. There are other ways to approach it which many would say are *better*.

Some Promise libraries have added methods for registering something like a "global unhandled rejection" handler, which would be called instead of a globally thrown error. But their solution for how to identify an error as "uncaught" is to have an arbitrary-length timer, say 3 seconds, running from time of rejection. If a Promise is rejected but no error handler is registered before the timer fires, then it's assumed that you won't ever be registering a handler, so it's "uncaught."

In practice, this has worked well for many libraries, as most usage patterns don't typically call for significant delay between Promise rejection and observation of that rejection. But this pattern is troublesome because 3 seconds is so arbitrary (even if empirical), and also because there are indeed some cases where you want a Promise to hold on to its rejectedness for some indefinite period of time, and you don't really want to have your "uncaught" handler called for all those false positives (not-yet-handled "uncaught errors").

Another more common suggestion is that Promises should have a `done(..)` added to them, which essentially marks the Promise chain as "done." `done(..)` doesn't create and return a Promise, so the callbacks passed to `done(..)` are obviously not wired up to report problems to a chained Promise that doesn't exist.

So what happens instead? It's treated as you might usually expect in uncaught error conditions: any exception inside a `done(..)` rejection handler would be thrown as a global uncaught error (in the developer console, basically):

```js
var p = Promise.resolve( 42 );

p.then(
	function fulfilled(msg){
		// numbers don't have string functions,
		// so will throw an error
		console.log( msg.toLowerCase() );
	}
)
.done( null, handleErrors );

// if `handleErrors(..)` caused its own exception, it would
// be thrown globally here
```

This might sound more attractive than the never-ending chain or the arbitrary timeouts. But the biggest problem is that it's not part of the ES6 standard, so no matter how good it sounds, at best it's a lot longer way off from being a reliable and ubiquitous solution.

Are we just stuck, then? Not entirely.

Browsers have a unique capability that our code does not have: they can track and know for sure when any object gets thrown away and garbage collected. So, browsers can track Promise objects, and whenever they get garbage collected, if they have a rejection in them, the browser knows for sure this was a legitimate "uncaught error," and can thus confidently know it should report it to the developer console.

**Note:** At the time of this writing, both Chrome and Firefox have early attempts at that sort of "uncaught rejection" capability, though support is incomplete at best.

However, if a Promise doesn't get garbage collected -- it's exceedingly easy for that to accidentally happen through lots of different coding patterns -- the browser's garbage collection sniffing won't help you know and diagnose that you have a silently rejected Promise laying around.

Is there any other alternative? Yes.

### Pit of Success

The following is just theoretical, how Promises *could* be someday changed to behave. I believe it would be far superior to what we currently have. And I think this change would be possible even post-ES6 because I don't think it would break web compatibility with ES6 Promises. Moreover, it can be polyfilled/prollyfilled in, if you're careful. Let's take a look:

* Promises could default to reporting (to the developer console) any rejection, on the next Job or event loop tick, if at that exact moment no error handler has been registered for the Promise.
* For the cases where you want a rejected Promise to hold onto its rejected state for an indefinite amount of time before observing, you could call `defer()`, which suppresses automatic error reporting on that Promise.

If a Promise is rejected, it defaults to noisily reporting that fact to the developer console (instead of defaulting to silence). You can opt out of that reporting either implicitly (by registering an error handler before rejection), or explicitly (with `defer()`). In either case, *you* control the false positives.

Consider:

```js
var p = Promise.reject( "Oops" ).defer();

// `foo(..)` is Promise-aware
foo( 42 )
.then(
	function fulfilled(){
		return p;
	},
	function rejected(err){
		// handle `foo(..)` error
	}
);
...
```

When we create `p`, we know we're going to wait a while to use/observe its rejection, so we call `defer()` -- thus no global reporting. `defer()` simply returns the same promise, for chaining purposes.

The promise returned from `foo(..)` gets an error handler attached *right away*, so it's implicitly opted out and no global reporting for it occurs either.

But the promise returned from the `then(..)` call has no `defer()` or error handler attached, so if it rejects (from inside either resolution handler), then *it* will be reported to the developer console as an uncaught error.

**This design is a pit of success.** By default, all errors are either handled or reported -- what almost all developers in almost all cases would expect. You either have to register a handler or you have to intentionally opt out, and indicate you intend to defer error handling until *later*; you're opting for the extra responsibility in just that specific case.

The only real danger in this approach is if you `defer()` a Promise but then fail to actually ever observe/handle its rejection.

But you had to intentionally call `defer()` to opt into that pit of despair -- the default was the pit of success -- so there's not much else we could do to save you from your own mistakes.

I think there's still hope for Promise error handling (post-ES6). I hope the powers that be will rethink the situation and consider this alternative. In the meantime, you can implement this yourself (a challenging exercise for the reader!), or use a *smarter* Promise library that does so for you!

**Note:** This exact model for error handling/reporting is implemented in my *asynquence* Promise abstraction library, which will be discussed in Appendix A of this book.

## Promise Patterns

We've already implicitly seen the sequence pattern with Promise chains (this-then-this-then-that flow control) but there are lots of variations on asynchronous patterns that we can build as abstractions on top of Promises. These patterns serve to simplify the expression of async flow control -- which helps make our code more reason-able and more maintainable -- even in the most complex parts of our programs.

Two such patterns are codified directly into the native ES6 `Promise` implementation, so we get them for free, to use as building blocks for other patterns.

### Promise.all([ .. ])

In an async sequence (Promise chain), only one async task is being coordinated at any given moment -- step 2 strictly follows step 1, and step 3 strictly follows step 2. But what about doing two or more steps concurrently (aka "in parallel")?

In classic programming terminology, a "gate" is a mechanism that waits on two or more parallel/concurrent tasks to complete before continuing. It doesn't matter what order they finish in, just that all of them have to complete for the gate to open and let the flow control through.

In the Promise API, we call this pattern `all([ .. ])`.

Say you wanted to make two Ajax requests at the same time, and wait for both to finish, regardless of their order, before making a third Ajax request. Consider:

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility,
// like we defined earlier in the chapter

var p1 = request( "http://some.url.1/" );
var p2 = request( "http://some.url.2/" );

Promise.all( [p1,p2] )
.then( function(msgs){
	// both `p1` and `p2` fulfill and pass in
	// their messages here
	return request(
		"http://some.url.3/?v=" + msgs.join(",")
	);
} )
.then( function(msg){
	console.log( msg );
} );
```

`Promise.all([ .. ])` expects a single argument, an `array`, consisting generally of Promise instances. The promise returned from the `Promise.all([ .. ])` call will receive a fulfillment message (`msgs` in this snippet) that is an `array` of all the fulfillment messages from the passed in promises, in the same order as specified (regardless of fulfillment order).

**Note:** Technically, the `array` of values passed into `Promise.all([ .. ])` can include Promises, thenables, or even immediate values. Each value in the list is essentially passed through `Promise.resolve(..)` to make sure it's a genuine Promise to be waited on, so an immediate value will just be normalized into a Promise for that value. If the `array` is empty, the main Promise is immediately fulfilled.

The main promise returned from `Promise.all([ .. ])` will only be fulfilled if and when all its constituent promises are fulfilled. If any one of those promises instead is rejected, the main `Promise.all([ .. ])` promise is immediately rejected, discarding all results from any other promises.

Remember to always attach a rejection/error handler to every promise, even and especially the one that comes back from `Promise.all([ .. ])`.

### Promise.race([ .. ])

While `Promise.all([ .. ])` coordinates multiple Promises concurrently and assumes all are needed for fulfillment, sometimes you only want to respond to the "first Promise to cross the finish line," letting the other Promises fall away.

This pattern is classically called a "latch," but in Promises it's called a "race."

**Warning:** While the metaphor of "only the first across the finish line wins" fits the behavior well, unfortunately "race" is kind of a loaded term, because "race conditions" are generally taken as bugs in programs (see Chapter 1). Don't confuse `Promise.race([ .. ])` with "race condition."

`Promise.race([ .. ])` also expects a single `array` argument, containing one or more Promises, thenables, or immediate values. It doesn't make much practical sense to have a race with immediate values, because the first one listed will obviously win -- like a foot race where one runner starts at the finish line!

Similar to `Promise.all([ .. ])`, `Promise.race([ .. ])` will fulfill if and when any Promise resolution is a fulfillment, and it will reject if and when any Promise resolution is a rejection.

**Warning:** A "race" requires at least one "runner," so if you pass an empty `array`, instead of immediately resolving, the main `race([..])` Promise will never resolve. This is a footgun! ES6 should have specified that it either fulfills, rejects, or just throws some sort of synchronous error. Unfortunately, because of precedence in Promise libraries predating ES6 `Promise`, they had to leave this gotcha in there, so be careful never to send in an empty `array`.

Let's revisit our previous concurrent Ajax example, but in the context of a race between `p1` and `p2`:

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility,
// like we defined earlier in the chapter

var p1 = request( "http://some.url.1/" );
var p2 = request( "http://some.url.2/" );

Promise.race( [p1,p2] )
.then( function(msg){
	// either `p1` or `p2` will win the race
	return request(
		"http://some.url.3/?v=" + msg
	);
} )
.then( function(msg){
	console.log( msg );
} );
```

Because only one promise wins, the fulfillment value is a single message, not an `array` as it was for `Promise.all([ .. ])`.

#### Timeout Race

We saw this example earlier, illustrating how `Promise.race([ .. ])` can be used to express the "promise timeout" pattern:

```js
// `foo()` is a Promise-aware function

// `timeoutPromise(..)`, defined ealier, returns
// a Promise that rejects after a specified delay

// setup a timeout for `foo()`
Promise.race( [
	foo(),					// attempt `foo()`
	timeoutPromise( 3000 )	// give it 3 seconds
] )
.then(
	function(){
		// `foo(..)` fulfilled in time!
	},
	function(err){
		// either `foo()` rejected, or it just
		// didn't finish in time, so inspect
		// `err` to know which
	}
);
```

This timeout pattern works well in most cases. But there are some nuances to consider, and frankly they apply to both `Promise.race([ .. ])` and `Promise.all([ .. ])` equally.

#### "Finally"

The key question to ask is, "What happens to the promises that get discarded/ignored?" We're not asking that question from the performance perspective -- they would typically end up garbage collection eligible -- but from the behavioral perspective (side effects, etc.). Promises cannot be canceled -- and shouldn't be as that would destroy the external immutability trust discussed in the "Promise Uncancelable" section later in this chapter -- so they can only be silently ignored.

But what if `foo()` in the previous example is reserving some sort of resource for usage, but the timeout fires first and causes that promise to be ignored? Is there anything in this pattern that proactively frees the reserved resource after the timeout, or otherwise cancels any side effects it may have had? What if all you wanted was to log the fact that `foo()` timed out?

Some developers have proposed that Promises need a `finally(..)` callback registration, which is always called when a Promise resolves, and allows you to specify any cleanup that may be necessary. This doesn't exist in the specification at the moment, but it may come in ES7+. We'll have to wait and see.

It might look like:

```js
var p = Promise.resolve( 42 );

p.then( something )
.finally( cleanup )
.then( another )
.finally( cleanup );
```

**Note:** In various Promise libraries, `finally(..)` still creates and returns a new Promise (to keep the chain going). If the `cleanup(..)` function were to return a Promise, it would be linked into the chain, which means you could still have the unhandled rejection issues we discussed earlier.

In the meantime, we could make a static helper utility that lets us observe (without interfering) the resolution of a Promise:

```js
// polyfill-safe guard check
if (!Promise.observe) {
	Promise.observe = function(pr,cb) {
		// side-observe `pr`'s resolution
		pr.then(
			function fulfilled(msg){
				// schedule callback async (as Job)
				Promise.resolve( msg ).then( cb );
			},
			function rejected(err){
				// schedule callback async (as Job)
				Promise.resolve( err ).then( cb );
			}
		);

		// return original promise
		return pr;
	};
}
```

Here's how we'd use it in the timeout example from before:

```js
Promise.race( [
	Promise.observe(
		foo(),					// attempt `foo()`
		function cleanup(msg){
			// clean up after `foo()`, even if it
			// didn't finish before the timeout
		}
	),
	timeoutPromise( 3000 )	// give it 3 seconds
] )
```

This `Promise.observe(..)` helper is just an illustration of how you could observe the completions of Promises without interfering with them. Other Promise libraries have their own solutions. Regardless of how you do it, you'll likely have places where you want to make sure your Promises aren't *just* silently ignored by accident.

### Variations on all([ .. ]) and race([ .. ])

While native ES6 Promises come with built-in `Promise.all([ .. ])` and `Promise.race([ .. ])`, there are several other commonly used patterns with variations on those semantics:

* `none([ .. ])` is like `all([ .. ])`, but fulfillments and rejections are transposed. All Promises need to be rejected -- rejections become the fulfillment values and vice versa.
* `any([ .. ])` is like `all([ .. ])`, but it ignores any rejections, so only one needs to fulfill instead of *all* of them.
* `first([ .. ])` is like a race with `any([ .. ])`, which is that it ignores any rejections and fulfills as soon as the first Promise fulfills.
* `last([ .. ])` is like `first([ .. ])`, but only the latest fulfillment wins.

Some Promise abstraction libraries provide these, but you could also define them yourself using the mechanics of Promises, `race([ .. ])` and `all([ .. ])`.

For example, here's how we could define `first([ .. ])`:

```js
// polyfill-safe guard check
if (!Promise.first) {
	Promise.first = function(prs) {
		return new Promise( function(resolve,reject){
			// loop through all promises
			prs.forEach( function(pr){
				// normalize the value
				Promise.resolve( pr )
				// whichever one fulfills first wins, and
				// gets to resolve the main promise
				.then( resolve );
			} );
		} );
	};
}
```

**Note:** This implementation of `first(..)` does not reject if all its promises reject; it simply hangs, much like a `Promise.race([])` does. If desired, you could add additional logic to track each promise rejection and if all reject, call `reject()` on the main promise. We'll leave that as an exercise for the reader.

### Concurrent Iterations

Sometimes you want to iterate over a list of Promises and perform some task against all of them, much like you can do with synchronous `array`s (e.g., `forEach(..)`, `map(..)`, `some(..)`, and `every(..)`). If the task to perform against each Promise is fundamentally synchronous, these work fine, just as we used `forEach(..)` in the previous snippet.

But if the tasks are fundamentally asynchronous, or can/should otherwise be performed concurrently, you can use async versions of these utilities as provided by many libraries.

For example, let's consider an asynchronous `map(..)` utility that takes an `array` of values (could be Promises or anything else), plus a function (task) to perform against each. `map(..)` itself returns a promise whose fulfillment value is an `array` that holds (in the same mapping order) the async fulfillment value from each task:

```js
if (!Promise.map) {
	Promise.map = function(vals,cb) {
		// new promise that waits for all mapped promises
		return Promise.all(
			// note: regular array `map(..)`, turns
			// the array of values into an array of
			// promises
			vals.map( function(val){
				// replace `val` with a new promise that
				// resolves after `val` is async mapped
				return new Promise( function(resolve){
					cb( val, resolve );
				} );
			} )
		);
	};
}
```

**Note:** In this implementation of `map(..)`, you can't signal async rejection, but if a synchronous exception/error occurs inside of the mapping callback (`cb(..)`), the main `Promise.map(..)` returned promise would reject.

Let's illustrate using `map(..)` with a list of Promises (instead of simple values):

```js
var p1 = Promise.resolve( 21 );
var p2 = Promise.resolve( 42 );
var p3 = Promise.reject( "Oops" );

// double values in list even if they're in
// Promises
Promise.map( [p1,p2,p3], function(pr,done){
	// make sure the item itself is a Promise
	Promise.resolve( pr )
	.then(
		// extract value as `v`
		function(v){
			// map fulfillment `v` to new value
			done( v * 2 );
		},
		// or, map to promise rejection message
		done
	);
} )
.then( function(vals){
	console.log( vals );	// [42,84,"Oops"]
} );
```

