## Generators + Promises

In our previous discussion, we showed how generators can be iterated asynchronously, which is a huge step forward in sequential reason-ability over the spaghetti mess of callbacks. But we lost something very important: the trustability and composability of Promises (see Chapter 3)!

Don't worry -- we can get that back. The best of all worlds in ES6 is to combine generators (synchronous-looking async code) with Promises (trustable and composable).

But how?

Recall from Chapter 3 the Promise-based approach to our running Ajax example:

```js
function foo(x,y) {
	return request(
		"http://some.url.1/?x=" + x + "&y=" + y
	);
}

foo( 11, 31 )
.then(
	function(text){
		console.log( text );
	},
	function(err){
		console.error( err );
	}
);
```

In our earlier generator code for the running Ajax example, `foo(..)` returned nothing (`undefined`), and our *iterator* control code didn't care about that `yield`ed value.

But here the Promise-aware `foo(..)` returns a promise after making the Ajax call. That suggests that we could construct a promise with `foo(..)` and then `yield` it from the generator, and then the *iterator* control code would receive that promise.

But what should the *iterator* do with the promise?

It should listen for the promise to resolve (fulfillment or rejection), and then either resume the generator with the fulfillment message or throw an error into the generator with the rejection reason.

Let me repeat that, because it's so important. The natural way to get the most out of Promises and generators is **to `yield` a Promise**, and wire that Promise to control the generator's *iterator*.

Let's give it a try! First, we'll put the Promise-aware `foo(..)` together with the generator `*main()`:

```js
function foo(x,y) {
	return request(
		"http://some.url.1/?x=" + x + "&y=" + y
	);
}

function *main() {
	try {
		var text = yield foo( 11, 31 );
		console.log( text );
	}
	catch (err) {
		console.error( err );
	}
}
```

The most powerful revelation in this refactor is that the code inside `*main()` **did not have to change at all!** Inside the generator, whatever values are `yield`ed out is just an opaque implementation detail, so we're not even aware it's happening, nor do we need to worry about it.

But how are we going to run `*main()` now? We still have some of the implementation plumbing work to do, to receive and wire up the `yield`ed promise so that it resumes the generator upon resolution. We'll start by trying that manually:

```js
var it = main();

var p = it.next().value;

// wait for the `p` promise to resolve
p.then(
	function(text){
		it.next( text );
	},
	function(err){
		it.throw( err );
	}
);
```

Actually, that wasn't so painful at all, was it?

This snippet should look very similar to what we did earlier with the manually wired generator controlled by the error-first callback. Instead of an `if (err) { it.throw..`, the promise already splits fulfillment (success) and rejection (failure) for us, but otherwise the *iterator* control is identical.

Now, we've glossed over some important details.

Most importantly, we took advantage of the fact that we knew that `*main()` only had one Promise-aware step in it. What if we wanted to be able to Promise-drive a generator no matter how many steps it has? We certainly don't want to manually write out the Promise chain differently for each generator! What would be much nicer is if there was a way to repeat (aka "loop" over) the iteration control, and each time a Promise comes out, wait on its resolution before continuing.

Also, what if the generator throws out an error (intentionally or accidentally) during the `it.next(..)` call? Should we quit, or should we `catch` it and send it right back in? Similarly, what if we `it.throw(..)` a Promise rejection into the generator, but it's not handled, and comes right back out?

### Promise-Aware Generator Runner

The more you start to explore this path, the more you realize, "wow, it'd be great if there was just some utility to do it for me." And you're absolutely correct. This is such an important pattern, and you don't want to get it wrong (or exhaust yourself repeating it over and over), so your best bet is to use a utility that is specifically designed to *run* Promise-`yield`ing generators in the manner we've illustrated.

Several Promise abstraction libraries provide just such a utility, including my *asynquence* library and its `runner(..)`, which will be discussed in Appendix A of this book.

But for the sake of learning and illustration, let's just define our own standalone utility that we'll call `run(..)`:

```js
// thanks to Benjamin Gruenbaum (@benjamingr on GitHub) for
// big improvements here!
function run(gen) {
	var args = [].slice.call( arguments, 1), it;

	// initialize the generator in the current context
	it = gen.apply( this, args );

	// return a promise for the generator completing
	return Promise.resolve()
		.then( function handleNext(value){
			// run to the next yielded value
			var next = it.next( value );

			return (function handleResult(next){
				// generator has completed running?
				if (next.done) {
					return next.value;
				}
				// otherwise keep going
				else {
					return Promise.resolve( next.value )
						.then(
							// resume the async loop on
							// success, sending the resolved
							// value back into the generator
							handleNext,

							// if `value` is a rejected
							// promise, propagate error back
							// into the generator for its own
							// error handling
							function handleErr(err) {
								return Promise.resolve(
									it.throw( err )
								)
								.then( handleResult );
							}
						);
				}
			})(next);
		} );
}
```

As you can see, it's a quite a bit more complex than you'd probably want to author yourself, and you especially wouldn't want to repeat this code for each generator you use. So, a utility/library helper is definitely the way to go. Nevertheless, I encourage you to spend a few minutes studying that code listing to get a better sense of how to manage the generator+Promise negotiation.

How would you use `run(..)` with `*main()` in our *running* Ajax example?

```js
function *main() {
	// ..
}

run( main );
```

That's it! The way we wired `run(..)`, it will automatically advance the generator you pass to it, asynchronously until completion.

**Note:** The `run(..)` we defined returns a promise which is wired to resolve once the generator is complete, or receive an uncaught exception if the generator doesn't handle it. We don't show that capability here, but we'll come back to it later in the chapter.

#### ES7: `async` and `await`?

The preceding pattern -- generators yielding Promises that then control the generator's *iterator* to advance it to completion -- is such a powerful and useful approach, it would be nicer if we could do it without the clutter of the library utility helper (aka `run(..)`).

There's probably good news on that front. At the time of this writing, there's early but strong support for a proposal for more syntactic addition in this realm for the post-ES6, ES7-ish timeframe. Obviously, it's too early to guarantee the details, but there's a pretty decent chance it will shake out similar to the following:

```js
function foo(x,y) {
	return request(
		"http://some.url.1/?x=" + x + "&y=" + y
	);
}

async function main() {
	try {
		var text = await foo( 11, 31 );
		console.log( text );
	}
	catch (err) {
		console.error( err );
	}
}

main();
```

As you can see, there's no `run(..)` call (meaning no need for a library utility!) to invoke and drive `main()` -- it's just called as a normal function. Also, `main()` isn't declared as a generator function anymore; it's a new kind of function: `async function`. And finally, instead of `yield`ing a Promise, we `await` for it to resolve.

The `async function` automatically knows what to do if you `await` a Promise -- it will pause the function (just like with generators) until the Promise resolves. We didn't illustrate it in this snippet, but calling an async function like `main()` automatically returns a promise that's resolved whenever the function finishes completely.

**Tip:** The `async` / `await` syntax should look very familiar to readers with  experience in C#, because it's basically identical.

The proposal essentially codifies support for the pattern we've already derived, into a syntactic mechanism: combining Promises with sync-looking flow control code. That's the best of both worlds combined, to effectively address practically all of the major concerns we outlined with callbacks.

The mere fact that such a ES7-ish proposal already exists and has early support and enthusiasm is a major vote of confidence in the future importance of this async pattern.

### Promise Concurrency in Generators

So far, all we've demonstrated is a single-step async flow with Promises+generators. But real-world code will often have many async steps.

If you're not careful, the sync-looking style of generators may lull you into complacency with how you structure your async concurrency, leading to suboptimal performance patterns. So we want to spend a little time exploring the options.

Imagine a scenario where you need to fetch data from two different sources, then combine those responses to make a third request, and finally print out the last response. We explored a similar scenario with Promises in Chapter 3, but let's reconsider it in the context of generators.

Your first instinct might be something like:

```js
function *foo() {
	var r1 = yield request( "http://some.url.1" );
	var r2 = yield request( "http://some.url.2" );

	var r3 = yield request(
		"http://some.url.3/?v=" + r1 + "," + r2
	);

	console.log( r3 );
}

// use previously defined `run(..)` utility
run( foo );
```

This code will work, but in the specifics of our scenario, it's not optimal. Can you spot why?

Because the `r1` and `r2` requests can -- and for performance reasons, *should* -- run concurrently, but in this code they will run sequentially; the `"http://some.url.2"` URL isn't Ajax fetched until after the `"http://some.url.1"` request is finished. These two requests are independent, so the better performance approach would likely be to have them run at the same time.

But how exactly would you do that with a generator and `yield`? We know that `yield` is only a single pause point in the code, so you can't really do two pauses at the same time.

The most natural and effective answer is to base the async flow on Promises, specifically on their capability to manage state in a time-independent fashion (see "Future Value" in Chapter 3).

The simplest approach:

```js
function *foo() {
	// make both requests "in parallel"
	var p1 = request( "http://some.url.1" );
	var p2 = request( "http://some.url.2" );

	// wait until both promises resolve
	var r1 = yield p1;
	var r2 = yield p2;

	var r3 = yield request(
		"http://some.url.3/?v=" + r1 + "," + r2
	);

	console.log( r3 );
}

// use previously defined `run(..)` utility
run( foo );
```

Why is this different from the previous snippet? Look at where the `yield` is and is not. `p1` and `p2` are promises for Ajax requests made concurrently (aka "in parallel"). It doesn't matter which one finishes first, because promises will hold onto their resolved state for as long as necessary.

Then we use two subsequent `yield` statements to wait for and retrieve the resolutions from the promises (into `r1` and `r2`, respectively). If `p1` resolves first, the `yield p1` resumes first then waits on the `yield p2` to resume. If `p2` resolves first, it will just patiently hold onto that resolution value until asked, but the `yield p1` will hold on first, until `p1` resolves.

Either way, both `p1` and `p2` will run concurrently, and both have to finish, in either order, before the `r3 = yield request..` Ajax request will be made.

If that flow control processing model sounds familiar, it's basically the same as what we identified in Chapter 3 as the "gate" pattern, enabled by the `Promise.all([ .. ])` utility. So, we could also express the flow control like this:

```js
function *foo() {
	// make both requests "in parallel," and
	// wait until both promises resolve
	var results = yield Promise.all( [
		request( "http://some.url.1" ),
		request( "http://some.url.2" )
	] );

	var r1 = results[0];
	var r2 = results[1];

	var r3 = yield request(
		"http://some.url.3/?v=" + r1 + "," + r2
	);

	console.log( r3 );
}

// use previously defined `run(..)` utility
run( foo );
```

**Note:** As we discussed in Chapter 3, we can even use ES6 destructuring assignment to simplify the `var r1 = .. var r2 = ..` assignments, with `var [r1,r2] = results`.

In other words, all of the concurrency capabilities of Promises are available to us in the generator+Promise approach. So in any place where you need more than sequential this-then-that async flow control steps, Promises are likely your best bet.

#### Promises, Hidden

As a word of stylistic caution, be careful about how much Promise logic you include **inside your generators**. The whole point of using generators for asynchrony in the way we've described is to create simple, sequential, sync-looking code, and to hide as much of the details of asynchrony away from that code as possible.

For example, this might be a cleaner approach:

```js
// note: normal function, not generator
function bar(url1,url2) {
	return Promise.all( [
		request( url1 ),
		request( url2 )
	] );
}

function *foo() {
	// hide the Promise-based concurrency details
	// inside `bar(..)`
	var results = yield bar(
		"http://some.url.1",
		"http://some.url.2"
	);

	var r1 = results[0];
	var r2 = results[1];

	var r3 = yield request(
		"http://some.url.3/?v=" + r1 + "," + r2
	);

	console.log( r3 );
}

// use previously defined `run(..)` utility
run( foo );
```

Inside `*foo()`, it's cleaner and clearer that all we're doing is just asking `bar(..)` to get us some `results`, and we'll `yield`-wait on that to happen. We don't have to care that under the covers a `Promise.all([ .. ])` Promise composition will be used to make that happen.

**We treat asynchrony, and indeed Promises, as an implementation detail.**

Hiding your Promise logic inside a function that you merely call from your generator is especially useful if you're going to do a sophisticated series flow-control. For example:

```js
function bar() {
	return	Promise.all( [
		  baz( .. )
		  .then( .. ),
		  Promise.race( [ .. ] )
		] )
		.then( .. )
}
```

That kind of logic is sometimes required, and if you dump it directly inside your generator(s), you've defeated most of the reason why you would want to use generators in the first place. We *should* intentionally abstract such details away from our generator code so that they don't clutter up the higher level task expression.

Beyond creating code that is both functional and performant, you should also strive to make code that is as reason-able and maintainable as possible.

**Note:** Abstraction is not *always* a healthy thing for programming -- many times it can increase complexity in exchange for terseness. But in this case, I believe it's much healthier for your generator+Promise async code than the alternatives. As with all such advice, though, pay attention to your specific situations and make proper decisions for you and your team.

## Generator Delegation

In the previous section, we showed calling regular functions from inside a generator, and how that remains a useful technique for abstracting away implementation details (like async Promise flow). But the main drawback of using a normal function for this task is that it has to behave by the normal function rules, which means it cannot pause itself with `yield` like a generator can.

It may then occur to you that you might try to call one generator from another generator, using our `run(..)` helper, such as:

```js
function *foo() {
	var r2 = yield request( "http://some.url.2" );
	var r3 = yield request( "http://some.url.3/?v=" + r2 );

	return r3;
}

function *bar() {
	var r1 = yield request( "http://some.url.1" );

	// "delegating" to `*foo()` via `run(..)`
	var r3 = yield run( foo );

	console.log( r3 );
}

run( bar );
```

We run `*foo()` inside of `*bar()` by using our `run(..)` utility again. We take advantage here of the fact that the `run(..)` we defined earlier returns a promise which is resolved when its generator is run to completion (or errors out), so if we `yield` out to a `run(..)` instance the promise from another `run(..)` call, it automatically pauses `*bar()` until `*foo()` finishes.

But there's an even better way to integrate calling `*foo()` into `*bar()`, and it's called `yield`-delegation. The special syntax for `yield`-delegation is: `yield * __` (notice the extra `*`). Before we see it work in our previous example, let's look at a simpler scenario:

```js
function *foo() {
	console.log( "`*foo()` starting" );
	yield 3;
	yield 4;
	console.log( "`*foo()` finished" );
}

function *bar() {
	yield 1;
	yield 2;
	yield *foo();	// `yield`-delegation!
	yield 5;
}

var it = bar();

it.next().value;	// 1
it.next().value;	// 2
it.next().value;	// `*foo()` starting
					// 3
it.next().value;	// 4
it.next().value;	// `*foo()` finished
					// 5
```

**Note:** Similar to a note earlier in the chapter where I explained why I prefer `function *foo() ..` instead of `function* foo() ..`, I also prefer -- differing from most other documentation on the topic -- to say `yield *foo()` instead of `yield* foo()`. The placement of the `*` is purely stylistic and up to your best judgment. But I find the consistency of styling attractive.

How does the `yield *foo()` delegation work?

First, calling `foo()` creates an *iterator* exactly as we've already seen. Then, `yield *` delegates/transfers the *iterator* instance control (of the present `*bar()` generator) over to this other `*foo()` *iterator*.

So, the first two `it.next()` calls are controlling `*bar()`, but when we make the third `it.next()` call, now `*foo()` starts up, and now we're controlling `*foo()` instead of `*bar()`. That's why it's called delegation -- `*bar()` delegated its iteration control to `*foo()`.

As soon as the `it` *iterator* control exhausts the entire `*foo()` *iterator*, it automatically returns to controlling `*bar()`.

So now back to the previous example with the three sequential Ajax requests:

```js
function *foo() {
	var r2 = yield request( "http://some.url.2" );
	var r3 = yield request( "http://some.url.3/?v=" + r2 );

	return r3;
}

function *bar() {
	var r1 = yield request( "http://some.url.1" );

	// "delegating" to `*foo()` via `yield*`
	var r3 = yield *foo();

	console.log( r3 );
}

run( bar );
```

The only difference between this snippet and the version used earlier is the use of `yield *foo()` instead of the previous `yield run(foo)`.

**Note:** `yield *` yields iteration control, not generator control; when you invoke the `*foo()` generator, you're now `yield`-delegating to its *iterator*. But you can actually `yield`-delegate to any *iterable*; `yield *[1,2,3]` would consume the default *iterator* for the `[1,2,3]` array value.

### Why Delegation?

The purpose of `yield`-delegation is mostly code organization, and in that way is symmetrical with normal function calling.

Imagine two modules that respectively provide methods `foo()` and `bar()`, where `bar()` calls `foo()`. The reason the two are separate is generally because the proper organization of code for the program calls for them to be in separate functions. For example, there may be cases where `foo()` is called standalone, and other places where `bar()` calls `foo()`.

For all these exact same reasons, keeping generators separate aids in program readability, maintenance, and debuggability. In that respect, `yield *` is a syntactic shortcut for manually iterating over the steps of `*foo()` while inside of `*bar()`.

Such manual approach would be especially complex if the steps in `*foo()` were asynchronous, which is why you'd probably need to use that `run(..)` utility to do it. And as we've shown, `yield *foo()` eliminates the need for a sub-instance of the `run(..)` utility (like `run(foo)`).

### Delegating Messages

You may wonder how this `yield`-delegation works not just with *iterator* control but with the two-way message passing. Carefully follow the flow of messages in and out, through the `yield`-delegation:

```js
function *foo() {
	console.log( "inside `*foo()`:", yield "B" );

	console.log( "inside `*foo()`:", yield "C" );

	return "D";
}

function *bar() {
	console.log( "inside `*bar()`:", yield "A" );

	// `yield`-delegation!
	console.log( "inside `*bar()`:", yield *foo() );

	console.log( "inside `*bar()`:", yield "E" );

	return "F";
}

var it = bar();

console.log( "outside:", it.next().value );
// outside: A

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 1 ).value );
// inside `*bar()`: 1
// outside: B

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 2 ).value );
// inside `*foo()`: 2
// outside: C

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 3 ).value );
// inside `*foo()`: 3
// inside `*bar()`: D
// outside: E

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 4 ).value );
// inside `*bar()`: 4
// outside: F
```

Pay particular attention to the processing steps after the `it.next(3)` call:

1. The `3` value is passed (through the `yield`-delegation in `*bar()`) into the waiting `yield "C"` expression inside of `*foo()`.
2. `*foo()` then calls `return "D"`, but this value doesn't get returned all the way back to the outside `it.next(3)` call.
3. Instead, the `"D"` value is sent as the result of the waiting `yield *foo()` expression inside of `*bar()` -- this `yield`-delegation expression has essentially been paused while all of `*foo()` was exhausted. So `"D"` ends up inside of `*bar()` for it to print out.
4. `yield "E"` is called inside of `*bar()`, and the `"E"` value is yielded to the outside as the result of the `it.next(3)` call.

From the perspective of the external *iterator* (`it`), it doesn't appear any differently between controlling the initial generator or a delegated one.

In fact, `yield`-delegation doesn't even have to be directed to another generator; it can just be directed to a non-generator, general *iterable*. For example:

```js
function *bar() {
	console.log( "inside `*bar()`:", yield "A" );

	// `yield`-delegation to a non-generator!
	console.log( "inside `*bar()`:", yield *[ "B", "C", "D" ] );

	console.log( "inside `*bar()`:", yield "E" );

	return "F";
}

var it = bar();

console.log( "outside:", it.next().value );
// outside: A

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 1 ).value );
// inside `*bar()`: 1
// outside: B

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 2 ).value );
// outside: C

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 3 ).value );
// outside: D

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 4 ).value );
// inside `*bar()`: undefined
// outside: E

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 5 ).value );
// inside `*bar()`: 5
// outside: F
```

Notice the differences in where the messages were received/reported between this example and the one previous.

Most strikingly, the default `array` *iterator* doesn't care about any messages sent in via `next(..)` calls, so the values `2`, `3`, and `4` are essentially ignored. Also, because that *iterator* has no explicit `return` value (unlike the previously used `*foo()`), the `yield *` expression gets an `undefined` when it finishes.

#### Exceptions Delegated, Too!

In the same way that `yield`-delegation transparently passes messages through in both directions, errors/exceptions also pass in both directions:

```js
function *foo() {
	try {
		yield "B";
	}
	catch (err) {
		console.log( "error caught inside `*foo()`:", err );
	}

	yield "C";

	throw "D";
}

function *bar() {
	yield "A";

	try {
		yield *foo();
	}
	catch (err) {
		console.log( "error caught inside `*bar()`:", err );
	}

	yield "E";

	yield *baz();

	// note: can't get here!
	yield "G";
}

function *baz() {
	throw "F";
}

var it = bar();

console.log( "outside:", it.next().value );
// outside: A

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 1 ).value );
// outside: B

console.log( "outside:", it.throw( 2 ).value );
// error caught inside `*foo()`: 2
// outside: C

console.log( "outside:", it.next( 3 ).value );
// error caught inside `*bar()`: D
// outside: E

try {
	console.log( "outside:", it.next( 4 ).value );
}
catch (err) {
	console.log( "error caught outside:", err );
}
// error caught outside: F
```

Some things to note from this snippet:

1. When we call `it.throw(2)`, it sends the error message `2` into `*bar()`, which delegates that to `*foo()`, which then `catch`es it and handles it gracefully. Then, the `yield "C"` sends `"C"` back out as the return `value` from the `it.throw(2)` call.
2. The `"D"` value that's next `throw`n from inside `*foo()` propagates out to `*bar()`, which `catch`es it and handles it gracefully. Then the `yield "E"` sends `"E"` back out as the return `value` from the `it.next(3)` call.
3. Next, the exception `throw`n from `*baz()` isn't caught in `*bar()` -- though we did `catch` it outside -- so both `*baz()` and `*bar()` are set to a completed state. After this snippet, you would not be able to get the `"G"` value out with any subsequent `next(..)` call(s) -- they will just return `undefined` for `value`.

### Delegating Asynchrony

Let's finally get back to our earlier `yield`-delegation example with the multiple sequential Ajax requests:

```js
function *foo() {
	var r2 = yield request( "http://some.url.2" );
	var r3 = yield request( "http://some.url.3/?v=" + r2 );

	return r3;
}

function *bar() {
	var r1 = yield request( "http://some.url.1" );

	var r3 = yield *foo();

	console.log( r3 );
}

run( bar );
```

Instead of calling `yield run(foo)` inside of `*bar()`, we just call `yield *foo()`.

In the previous version of this example, the Promise mechanism (controlled by `run(..)`) was used to transport the value from `return r3` in `*foo()` to the local variable `r3` inside `*bar()`. Now, that value is just returned back directly via the `yield *` mechanics.

Otherwise, the behavior is pretty much identical.

### Delegating "Recursion"

Of course, `yield`-delegation can keep following as many delegation steps as you wire up. You could even use `yield`-delegation for async-capable generator "recursion" -- a generator `yield`-delegating to itself:

```js
function *foo(val) {
	if (val > 1) {
		// generator recursion
		val = yield *foo( val - 1 );
	}

	return yield request( "http://some.url/?v=" + val );
}

function *bar() {
	var r1 = yield *foo( 3 );
	console.log( r1 );
}

run( bar );
```

**Note:** Our `run(..)` utility could have been called with `run( foo, 3 )`, because it supports additional parameters being passed along to the initialization of the generator. However, we used a parameter-free `*bar()` here to highlight the flexibility of `yield *`.

What processing steps follow from that code? Hang on, this is going to be quite intricate to describe in detail:

1. `run(bar)` starts up the `*bar()` generator.
2. `foo(3)` creates an *iterator* for `*foo(..)` and passes `3` as its `val` parameter.
3. Because `3 > 1`, `foo(2)` creates another *iterator* and passes in `2` as its `val` parameter.
4. Because `2 > 1`, `foo(1)` creates yet another *iterator* and passes in `1` as its `val` parameter.
5. `1 > 1` is `false`, so we next call `request(..)` with the `1` value, and get a promise back for that first Ajax call.
6. That promise is `yield`ed out, which comes back to the `*foo(2)` generator instance.
7. The `yield *` passes that promise back out to the `*foo(3)` generator instance. Another `yield *` passes the promise out to the `*bar()` generator instance. And yet again another `yield *` passes the promise out to the `run(..)` utility, which will wait on that promise (for the first Ajax request) to proceed.
8. When the promise resolves, its fulfillment message is sent to resume `*bar()`, which passes through the `yield *` into the `*foo(3)` instance, which then passes through the `yield *` to the `*foo(2)` generator instance, which then passes through the `yield *` to the normal `yield` that's waiting in the `*foo(3)` generator instance.
9. That first call's Ajax response is now immediately `return`ed from the `*foo(3)` generator instance, which sends that value back as the result of the `yield *` expression in the `*foo(2)` instance, and assigned to its local `val` variable.
10. Inside `*foo(2)`, a second Ajax request is made with `request(..)`, whose promise is `yield`ed back to the `*foo(1)` instance, and then `yield *` propagates all the way out to `run(..)` (step 7 again). When the promise resolves, the second Ajax response propagates all the way back into the `*foo(2)` generator instance, and is assigned to its local `val` variable.
11. Finally, the third Ajax request is made with `request(..)`, its promise goes out to `run(..)`, and then its resolution value comes all the way back, which is then `return`ed so that it comes back to the waiting `yield *` expression in `*bar()`.

Phew! A lot of crazy mental juggling, huh? You might want to read through that a few more times, and then go grab a snack to clear your head!

