## Generator Concurrency

As we discussed in both Chapter 1 and earlier in this chapter, two simultaneously running "processes" can cooperatively interleave their operations, and many times this can *yield* (pun intended) very powerful asynchrony expressions.

Frankly, our earlier examples of concurrency interleaving of multiple generators showed how to make it really confusing. But we hinted that there's places where this capability is quite useful.

Recall a scenario we looked at in Chapter 1, where two different simultaneous Ajax response handlers needed to coordinate with each other to make sure that the data communication was not a race condition. We slotted the responses into the `res` array like this:

```js
function response(data) {
	if (data.url == "http://some.url.1") {
		res[0] = data;
	}
	else if (data.url == "http://some.url.2") {
		res[1] = data;
	}
}
```

But how can we use multiple generators concurrently for this scenario?

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility

var res = [];

function *reqData(url) {
	res.push(
		yield request( url )
	);
}
```

**Note:** We're going to use two instances of the `*reqData(..)` generator here, but there's no difference to running a single instance of two different generators; both approaches are reasoned about identically. We'll see two different generators coordinating in just a bit.

Instead of having to manually sort out `res[0]` and `res[1]` assignments, we'll use coordinated ordering so that `res.push(..)` properly slots the values in the expected and predictable order. The expressed logic thus should feel a bit cleaner.

But how will we actually orchestrate this interaction? First, let's just do it manually, with Promises:

```js
var it1 = reqData( "http://some.url.1" );
var it2 = reqData( "http://some.url.2" );

var p1 = it1.next().value;
var p2 = it2.next().value;

p1
.then( function(data){
	it1.next( data );
	return p2;
} )
.then( function(data){
	it2.next( data );
} );
```

`*reqData(..)`'s two instances are both started to make their Ajax requests, then paused with `yield`. Then we choose to resume the first instance when `p1` resolves, and then `p2`'s resolution will restart the second instance. In this way, we use Promise orchestration to ensure that `res[0]` will have the first response and `res[1]` will have the second response.

But frankly, this is awfully manual, and it doesn't really let the generators orchestrate themselves, which is where the true power can lie. Let's try it a different way:

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility

var res = [];

function *reqData(url) {
	var data = yield request( url );

	// transfer control
	yield;

	res.push( data );
}

var it1 = reqData( "http://some.url.1" );
var it2 = reqData( "http://some.url.2" );

var p1 = it1.next().value;
var p2 = it2.next().value;

p1.then( function(data){
	it1.next( data );
} );

p2.then( function(data){
	it2.next( data );
} );

Promise.all( [p1,p2] )
.then( function(){
	it1.next();
	it2.next();
} );
```

OK, this is a bit better (though still manual!), because now the two instances of `*reqData(..)` run truly concurrently, and (at least for the first part) independently.

In the previous snippet, the second instance was not given its data until after the first instance was totally finished. But here, both instances receive their data as soon as their respective responses come back, and then each instance does another `yield` for control transfer purposes. We then choose what order to resume them in the `Promise.all([ .. ])` handler.

What may not be as obvious is that this approach hints at an easier form for a reusable utility, because of the symmetry. We can do even better. Let's imagine using a utility called `runAll(..)`:

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility

var res = [];

runAll(
	function*(){
		var p1 = request( "http://some.url.1" );

		// transfer control
		yield;

		res.push( yield p1 );
	},
	function*(){
		var p2 = request( "http://some.url.2" );

		// transfer control
		yield;

		res.push( yield p2 );
	}
);
```

**Note:** We're not including a code listing for `runAll(..)` as it is not only long enough to bog down the text, but is an extension of the logic we've already implemented in `run(..)` earlier. So, as a good supplementary exercise for the reader, try your hand at evolving the code from `run(..)` to work like the imagined `runAll(..)`. Also, my *asynquence* library provides a previously mentioned `runner(..)` utility with this kind of capability already built in, and will be discussed in Appendix A of this book.

Here's how the processing inside `runAll(..)` would operate:

1. The first generator gets a promise for the first Ajax response from `"http://some.url.1"`, then `yield`s control back to the `runAll(..)` utility.
2. The second generator runs and does the same for `"http://some.url.2"`, `yield`ing control back to the `runAll(..)` utility.
3. The first generator resumes, and then `yield`s out its promise `p1`. The `runAll(..)` utility does the same in this case as our previous `run(..)`, in that it waits on that promise to resolve, then resumes the same generator (no control transfer!). When `p1` resolves, `runAll(..)` resumes the first generator again with that resolution value, and then `res[0]` is given its value. When the first generator then finishes, that's an implicit transfer of control.
4. The second generator resumes, `yield`s out its promise `p2`, and waits for it to resolve. Once it does, `runAll(..)` resumes the second generator with that value, and `res[1]` is set.

In this running example, we use an outer variable called `res` to store the results of the two different Ajax responses -- that's our concurrency coordination making that possible.

But it might be quite helpful to further extend `runAll(..)` to provide an inner variable space for the multiple generator instances to *share*, such as an empty object we'll call `data` below. Also, it could take non-Promise values that are `yield`ed and hand them off to the next generator.

Consider:

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility

runAll(
	function*(data){
		data.res = [];

		// transfer control (and message pass)
		var url1 = yield "http://some.url.2";

		var p1 = request( url1 ); // "http://some.url.1"

		// transfer control
		yield;

		data.res.push( yield p1 );
	},
	function*(data){
		// transfer control (and message pass)
		var url2 = yield "http://some.url.1";

		var p2 = request( url2 ); // "http://some.url.2"

		// transfer control
		yield;

		data.res.push( yield p2 );
	}
);
```

In this formulation, the two generators are not just coordinating control transfer, but actually communicating with each other, both through `data.res` and the `yield`ed messages that trade `url1` and `url2` values. That's incredibly powerful!

Such realization also serves as a conceptual base for a more sophisticated asynchrony technique called CSP (Communicating Sequential Processes), which we will cover in Appendix B of this book.

## Thunks

So far, we've made the assumption that `yield`ing a Promise from a generator -- and having that Promise resume the generator via a helper utility like `run(..)` -- was the best possible way to manage asynchrony with generators. To be clear, it is.

But we skipped over another pattern that has some mildly widespread adoption, so in the interest of completeness we'll take a brief look at it.

In general computer science, there's an old pre-JS concept called a "thunk." Without getting bogged down in the historical nature, a narrow expression of a thunk in JS is a function that -- without any parameters -- is wired to call another function.

In other words, you wrap a function definition around function call -- with any parameters it needs -- to *defer* the execution of that call, and that wrapping function is a thunk. When you later execute the thunk, you end up calling the original function.

For example:

```js
function foo(x,y) {
	return x + y;
}

function fooThunk() {
	return foo( 3, 4 );
}

// later

console.log( fooThunk() );	// 7
```

So, a synchronous thunk is pretty straightforward. But what about an async thunk? We can essentially extend the narrow thunk definition to include it receiving a callback.

Consider:

```js
function foo(x,y,cb) {
	setTimeout( function(){
		cb( x + y );
	}, 1000 );
}

function fooThunk(cb) {
	foo( 3, 4, cb );
}

// later

fooThunk( function(sum){
	console.log( sum );		// 7
} );
```

As you can see, `fooThunk(..)` only expects a `cb(..)` parameter, as it already has values `3` and `4` (for `x` and `y`, respectively) pre-specified and ready to pass to `foo(..)`. A thunk is just waiting around patiently for the last piece it needs to do its job: the callback.

You don't want to make thunks manually, though. So, let's invent a utility that does this wrapping for us.

Consider:

```js
function thunkify(fn) {
	var args = [].slice.call( arguments, 1 );
	return function(cb) {
		args.push( cb );
		return fn.apply( null, args );
	};
}

var fooThunk = thunkify( foo, 3, 4 );

// later

fooThunk( function(sum) {
	console.log( sum );		// 7
} );
```

**Tip:** Here we assume that the original (`foo(..)`) function signature expects its callback in the last position, with any other parameters coming before it. This is a pretty ubiquitous "standard" for async JS function standards. You might call it "callback-last style." If for some reason you had a need to handle "callback-first style" signatures, you would just make a utility that used `args.unshift(..)` instead of `args.push(..)`.

The preceding formulation of `thunkify(..)` takes both the `foo(..)` function reference, and any parameters it needs, and returns back the thunk itself (`fooThunk(..)`). However, that's not the typical approach you'll find to thunks in JS.

Instead of `thunkify(..)` making the thunk itself, typically -- if not perplexingly -- the `thunkify(..)` utility would produce a function that produces thunks.

Uhhhh... yeah.

Consider:

```js
function thunkify(fn) {
	return function() {
		var args = [].slice.call( arguments );
		return function(cb) {
			args.push( cb );
			return fn.apply( null, args );
		};
	};
}
```

The main difference here is the extra `return function() { .. }` layer. Here's how its usage differs:

```js
var whatIsThis = thunkify( foo );

var fooThunk = whatIsThis( 3, 4 );

// later

fooThunk( function(sum) {
	console.log( sum );		// 7
} );
```

Obviously, the big question this snippet implies is what is `whatIsThis` properly called? It's not the thunk, it's the thing that will produce thunks from `foo(..)` calls. It's kind of like a "factory" for "thunks." There doesn't seem to be any kind of standard agreement for naming such a thing.

So, my proposal is "thunkory" ("thunk" + "factory").  So, `thunkify(..)` produces a thunkory, and a thunkory produces thunks. That reasoning is symmetric to my proposal for "promisory" in Chapter 3:

```js
var fooThunkory = thunkify( foo );

var fooThunk1 = fooThunkory( 3, 4 );
var fooThunk2 = fooThunkory( 5, 6 );

// later

fooThunk1( function(sum) {
	console.log( sum );		// 7
} );

fooThunk2( function(sum) {
	console.log( sum );		// 11
} );
```

**Note:** The running `foo(..)` example expects a style of callback that's not "error-first style." Of course, "error-first style" is much more common. If `foo(..)` had some sort of legitimate error-producing expectation, we could change it to expect and use an error-first callback. None of the subsequent `thunkify(..)` machinery cares what style of callback is assumed. The only difference in usage would be `fooThunk1(function(err,sum){..`.

Exposing the thunkory method -- instead of how the earlier `thunkify(..)` hides this intermediary step -- may seem like unnecessary complication. But in general, it's quite useful to make thunkories at the beginning of your program to wrap existing API methods, and then be able to pass around and call those thunkories when you need thunks. The two distinct steps preserve a cleaner separation of capability.

To illustrate:

```js
// cleaner:
var fooThunkory = thunkify( foo );

var fooThunk1 = fooThunkory( 3, 4 );
var fooThunk2 = fooThunkory( 5, 6 );

// instead of:
var fooThunk1 = thunkify( foo, 3, 4 );
var fooThunk2 = thunkify( foo, 5, 6 );
```

Regardless of whether you like to deal with the thunkories explicitly or not, the usage of thunks `fooThunk1(..)` and `fooThunk2(..)` remains the same.

### s/promise/thunk/

So what's all this thunk stuff have to do with generators?

Comparing thunks to promises generally: they're not directly interchangable as they're not equivalent in behavior. Promises are vastly more capable and trustable than bare thunks.

But in another sense, they both can be seen as a request for a value, which may be async in its answering.

Recall from Chapter 3 we defined a utility for promisifying a function, which we called `Promise.wrap(..)` -- we could have called it `promisify(..)`, too! This Promise-wrapping utility doesn't produce Promises; it produces promisories that in turn produce Promises. This is completely symmetric to the thunkories and thunks presently being discussed.

To illustrate the symmetry, let's first alter the running `foo(..)` example from earlier to assume an "error-first style" callback:

```js
function foo(x,y,cb) {
	setTimeout( function(){
		// assume `cb(..)` as "error-first style"
		cb( null, x + y );
	}, 1000 );
}
```

Now, we'll compare using `thunkify(..)` and `promisify(..)` (aka `Promise.wrap(..)` from Chapter 3):

```js
// symmetrical: constructing the question asker
var fooThunkory = thunkify( foo );
var fooPromisory = promisify( foo );

// symmetrical: asking the question
var fooThunk = fooThunkory( 3, 4 );
var fooPromise = fooPromisory( 3, 4 );

// get the thunk answer
fooThunk( function(err,sum){
	if (err) {
		console.error( err );
	}
	else {
		console.log( sum );		// 7
	}
} );

// get the promise answer
fooPromise
.then(
	function(sum){
		console.log( sum );		// 7
	},
	function(err){
		console.error( err );
	}
);
```

Both the thunkory and the promisory are essentially asking a question (for a value), and respectively the thunk `fooThunk` and promise `fooPromise` represent the future answers to that question. Presented in that light, the symmetry is clear.

With that perspective in mind, we can see that generators which `yield` Promises for asynchrony could instead `yield` thunks for asynchrony. All we'd need is a smarter `run(..)` utility (like from before) that can not only look for and wire up to a `yield`ed Promise but also to provide a callback to a `yield`ed thunk.

Consider:

```js
function *foo() {
	var val = yield request( "http://some.url.1" );
	console.log( val );
}

run( foo );
```

In this example, `request(..)` could either be a promisory that returns a promise, or a thunkory that returns a thunk. From the perspective of what's going on inside the generator code logic, we don't care about that implementation detail, which is quite powerful!

So, `request(..)` could be either:

```js
// promisory `request(..)` (see Chapter 3)
var request = Promise.wrap( ajax );

// vs.

// thunkory `request(..)`
var request = thunkify( ajax );
```

Finally, as a thunk-aware patch to our earlier `run(..)` utility, we would need logic like this:

```js
// ..
// did we receive a thunk back?
else if (typeof next.value == "function") {
	return new Promise( function(resolve,reject){
		// call the thunk with an error-first callback
		next.value( function(err,msg) {
			if (err) {
				reject( err );
			}
			else {
				resolve( msg );
			}
		} );
	} )
	.then(
		handleNext,
		function handleErr(err) {
			return Promise.resolve(
				it.throw( err )
			)
			.then( handleResult );
		}
	);
}
```

Now, our generators can either call promisories to `yield` Promises, or call thunkories to `yield` thunks, and in either case, `run(..)` would handle that value and use it to wait for the completion to resume the generator.

Symmetry wise, these two approaches look identical. However, we should point out that's true only from the perspective of Promises or thunks representing the future value continuation of a generator.

From the larger perspective, thunks do not in and of themselves have hardly any of the trustability or composability guarantees that Promises are designed with. Using a thunk as a stand-in for a Promise in this particular generator asynchrony pattern is workable but should be seen as less than ideal when compared to all the benefits that Promises offer (see Chapter 3).

If you have the option, prefer `yield pr` rather than `yield th`. But there's nothing wrong with having a `run(..)` utility which can handle both value types.

**Note:** The `runner(..)` utility in my *asynquence* library, which will be discussed in Appendix A, handles `yield`s of Promises, thunks and *asynquence* sequences.

## Pre-ES6 Generators

You're hopefully convinced now that generators are a very important addition to the async programming toolbox. But it's a new syntax in ES6, which means you can't just polyfill generators like you can Promises (which are just a new API). So what can we do to bring generators to our browser JS if we don't have the luxury of ignoring pre-ES6 browsers?

For all new syntax extensions in ES6, there are tools -- the most common term for them is transpilers, for trans-compilers -- which can take your ES6 syntax and transform it into equivalent (but obviously uglier!) pre-ES6 code. So, generators can be transpiled into code that will have the same behavior but work in ES5 and below.

But how? The "magic" of `yield` doesn't obviously sound like code that's easy to transpile. We actually hinted at a solution in our earlier discussion of closure-based *iterators*.

### Manual Transformation

Before we discuss the transpilers, let's derive how manual transpilation would work in the case of generators. This isn't just an academic exercise, because doing so will actually help further reinforce how they work.

Consider:

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility

function *foo(url) {
	try {
		console.log( "requesting:", url );
		var val = yield request( url );
		console.log( val );
	}
	catch (err) {
		console.log( "Oops:", err );
		return false;
	}
}

var it = foo( "http://some.url.1" );
```

The first thing to observe is that we'll still need a normal `foo()` function that can be called, and it will still need to return an *iterator*. So, let's sketch out the non-generator transformation:

```js
function foo(url) {

	// ..

	// make and return an iterator
	return {
		next: function(v) {
			// ..
		},
		throw: function(e) {
			// ..
		}
	};
}

var it = foo( "http://some.url.1" );
```

The next thing to observe is that a generator does its "magic" by suspending its scope/state, but we can emulate that with function closure (see the *Scope & Closures* title of this series). To understand how to write such code, we'll first annotate different parts of our generator with state values:

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility

function *foo(url) {
	// STATE *1*

	try {
		console.log( "requesting:", url );
		var TMP1 = request( url );

		// STATE *2*
		var val = yield TMP1;
		console.log( val );
	}
	catch (err) {
		// STATE *3*
		console.log( "Oops:", err );
		return false;
	}
}
```

**Note:** For more accurate illustration, we split up the `val = yield request..` statement into two parts, using the temporary `TMP1` variable. `request(..)` happens in state `*1*`, and the assignment of its completion value to `val` happens in state `*2*`. We'll get rid of that intermediate `TMP1` when we convert the code to its non-generator equivalent.

In other words, `*1*` is the beginning state, `*2*` is the state if the `request(..)` succeeds, and `*3*` is the state if the `request(..)` fails. You can probably imagine how any extra `yield` steps would just be encoded as extra states.

Back to our transpiled generator, let's define a variable `state` in the closure we can use to keep track of the state:

```js
function foo(url) {
	// manage generator state
	var state;

	// ..
}
```

Now, let's define an inner function called `process(..)` inside the closure which handles each state, using a `switch` statement:

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility

function foo(url) {
	// manage generator state
	var state;

	// generator-wide variable declarations
	var val;

	function process(v) {
		switch (state) {
			case 1:
				console.log( "requesting:", url );
				return request( url );
			case 2:
				val = v;
				console.log( val );
				return;
			case 3:
				var err = v;
				console.log( "Oops:", err );
				return false;
		}
	}

	// ..
}
```

Each state in our generator is represented by its own `case` in the `switch` statement. `process(..)` will be called each time we need to process a new state. We'll come back to how that works in just a moment.

For any generator-wide variable declarations (`val`), we move those to a `var` declaration outside of `process(..)` so they can survive multiple calls to `process(..)`. But the "block scoped" `err` variable is only needed for the `*3*` state, so we leave it in place.

In state `*1*`, instead of `yield request(..)`, we did `return request(..)`. In terminal state `*2*`, there was no explicit `return`, so we just do a `return;` which is the same as `return undefined`. In terminal state `*3*`, there was a `return false`, so we preserve that.

Now we need to define the code in the *iterator* functions so they call `process(..)` appropriately:

```js
function foo(url) {
	// manage generator state
	var state;

	// generator-wide variable declarations
	var val;

	function process(v) {
		switch (state) {
			case 1:
				console.log( "requesting:", url );
				return request( url );
			case 2:
				val = v;
				console.log( val );
				return;
			case 3:
				var err = v;
				console.log( "Oops:", err );
				return false;
		}
	}

	// make and return an iterator
	return {
		next: function(v) {
			// initial state
			if (!state) {
				state = 1;
				return {
					done: false,
					value: process()
				};
			}
			// yield resumed successfully
			else if (state == 1) {
				state = 2;
				return {
					done: true,
					value: process( v )
				};
			}
			// generator already completed
			else {
				return {
					done: true,
					value: undefined
				};
			}
		},
		"throw": function(e) {
			// the only explicit error handling is in
			// state *1*
			if (state == 1) {
				state = 3;
				return {
					done: true,
					value: process( e )
				};
			}
			// otherwise, an error won't be handled,
			// so just throw it right back out
			else {
				throw e;
			}
		}
	};
}
```

How does this code work?

1. The first call to the *iterator*'s `next()` call would move the generator from the uninitialized state to state `1`, and then call `process()` to handle that state. The return value from `request(..)`, which is the promise for the Ajax response, is returned back as the `value` property from the `next()` call.
2. If the Ajax request succeeds, the second call to `next(..)` should send in the Ajax response value, which moves our state to `2`. `process(..)` is again called (this time with the passed in Ajax response value), and the `value` property returned from `next(..)` will be `undefined`.
3. However, if the Ajax request fails, `throw(..)` should be called with the error, which would move the state from `1` to `3` (instead of `2`). Again `process(..)` is called, this time with the error value. That `case` returns `false`, which is set as the `value` property returned from the `throw(..)` call.

From the outside -- that is, interacting only with the *iterator* -- this `foo(..)` normal function works pretty much the same as the `*foo(..)` generator would have worked. So we've effectively "transpiled" our ES6 generator to pre-ES6 compatibility!

We could then manually instantiate our generator and control its iterator -- calling `var it = foo("..")` and `it.next(..)` and such -- or better, we could pass it to our previously defined `run(..)` utility as `run(foo,"..")`.

### Automatic Transpilation

The preceding exercise of manually deriving a transformation of our ES6 generator to pre-ES6 equivalent teaches us how generators work conceptually. But that transformation was really intricate and very non-portable to other generators in our code. It would be quite impractical to do this work by hand, and would completely obviate all the benefit of generators.

But luckily, several tools already exist that can automatically convert ES6 generators to things like what we derived in the previous section. Not only do they do the heavy lifting work for us, but they also handle several complications that we glossed over.

One such tool is regenerator (https://facebook.github.io/regenerator/), from the smart folks at Facebook.

If we use regenerator to transpile our previous generator, here's the code produced (at the time of this writing):

```js
// `request(..)` is a Promise-aware Ajax utility

var foo = regeneratorRuntime.mark(function foo(url) {
    var val;

    return regeneratorRuntime.wrap(function foo$(context$1$0) {
        while (1) switch (context$1$0.prev = context$1$0.next) {
        case 0:
            context$1$0.prev = 0;
            console.log( "requesting:", url );
            context$1$0.next = 4;
            return request( url );
        case 4:
            val = context$1$0.sent;
            console.log( val );
            context$1$0.next = 12;
            break;
        case 8:
            context$1$0.prev = 8;
            context$1$0.t0 = context$1$0.catch(0);
            console.log("Oops:", context$1$0.t0);
            return context$1$0.abrupt("return", false);
        case 12:
        case "end":
            return context$1$0.stop();
        }
    }, foo, this, [[0, 8]]);
});
```

There's some obvious similarities here to our manual derivation, such as the `switch` / `case` statements, and we even see `val` pulled out of the closure just as we did.

Of course, one trade-off is that regenerator's transpilation requires a helper library `regeneratorRuntime` that holds all the reusable logic for managing a general generator / *iterator*. A lot of that boilerplate looks different than our version, but even then, the concepts can be seen, like with `context$1$0.next = 4` keeping track of the next state for the generator.

The main takeaway is that generators are not restricted to only being useful in ES6+ environments. Once you understand the concepts, you can employ them throughout your code, and use tools to transform the code to be compatible with older environments.

This is more work than just using a `Promise` API polyfill for pre-ES6 Promises, but the effort is totally worth it, because generators are so much better at expressing async flow control in a reason-able, sensible, synchronous-looking, sequential fashion.

Once you get hooked on generators, you'll never want to go back to the hell of async spaghetti callbacks!

## Review

Generators are a new ES6 function type that does not run-to-completion like normal functions. Instead, the generator can be paused in mid-completion (entirely preserving its state), and it can later be resumed from where it left off.

This pause/resume interchange is cooperative rather than preemptive, which means that the generator has the sole capability to pause itself, using the `yield` keyword, and yet the *iterator* that controls the generator has the sole capability (via `next(..)`) to resume the generator.

The `yield` / `next(..)` duality is not just a control mechanism, it's actually a two-way message passing mechanism. A `yield ..` expression essentially pauses waiting for a value, and the next `next(..)` call passes a value (or implicit `undefined`) back to that paused `yield` expression.

The key benefit of generators related to async flow control is that the code inside a generator expresses a sequence of steps for the task in a naturally sync/sequential fashion. The trick is that we essentially hide potential asynchrony behind the `yield` keyword -- moving the asynchrony to the code where the generator's *iterator* is controlled.

In other words, generators preserve a sequential, synchronous, blocking code pattern for async code, which lets our brains reason about the code much more naturally, addressing one of the two key drawbacks of callback-based async.
