# You Don't Know JS: Async & Performance
# Chapter 4: Generators

In Chapter 2, we identified two key drawbacks to expressing async flow control with callbacks:

* Callback-based async doesn't fit how our brain plans out steps of a task.
* Callbacks aren't trustable or composable because of *inversion of control*.

In Chapter 3, we detailed how Promises uninvert the *inversion of control* of callbacks, restoring trustability/composability.

Now we turn our attention to expressing async flow control in a sequential, synchronous-looking fashion. The "magic" that makes it possible is ES6 **generators**.

## Breaking Run-to-Completion

In Chapter 1, we explained an expectation that JS developers almost universally rely on in their code: once a function starts executing, it runs until it completes, and no other code can interrupt and run in between.

As bizarre as it may seem, ES6 introduces a new type of function that does not behave with the run-to-completion behavior. This new type of function is called a "generator."

To understand the implications, let's consider this example:

```js
var x = 1;

function foo() {
	x++;
	bar();				// <-- what about this line?
	console.log( "x:", x );
}

function bar() {
	x++;
}

foo();					// x: 3
```

In this example, we know for sure that `bar()` runs in between `x++` and `console.log(x)`. But what if `bar()` wasn't there? Obviously, the result would be `2` instead of `3`.

Now let's twist your brain. What if `bar()` wasn't present, but it could still somehow run between the `x++` and `console.log(x)` statements? How would that be possible?

In **preemptive** multithreaded languages, it would essentially be possible for `bar()` to "interrupt" and run at exactly the right moment between those two statements. But JS is not preemptive, nor is it (currently) multithreaded. And yet, a **cooperative** form of this "interruption" (concurrency) is possible, if `foo()` itself could somehow indicate a "pause" at that part in the code.

**Note:** I use the word "cooperative" not only because of the connection to classical concurrency terminology (see Chapter 1), but because as you'll see in the next snippet, the ES6 syntax for indicating a pause point in code is `yield` -- suggesting a politely *cooperative* yielding of control.

Here's the ES6 code to accomplish such cooperative concurrency:

```js
var x = 1;

function *foo() {
	x++;
	yield; // pause!
	console.log( "x:", x );
}

function bar() {
	x++;
}
```

**Note:** You will likely see most other JS documentation/code that will format a generator declaration as `function* foo() { .. }` instead of as I've done here with `function *foo() { .. }` -- the only difference being the stylistic positioning of the `*`. The two forms are functionally/syntactically identical, as is a third `function*foo() { .. }` (no space) form. There are arguments for both styles, but I basically prefer `function *foo..` because it then matches when I reference a generator in writing with `*foo()`. If I said only `foo()`, you wouldn't know as clearly if I was talking about a generator or a regular function. It's purely a stylistic preference.

Now, how can we run the code in that previous snippet such that `bar()` executes at the point of the `yield` inside of `*foo()`?

```js
// construct an iterator `it` to control the generator
var it = foo();

// start `foo()` here!
it.next();
x;						// 2
bar();
x;						// 3
it.next();				// x: 3
```

OK, there's quite a bit of new and potentially confusing stuff in those two code snippets, so we've got plenty to wade through. But before we explain the different mechanics/syntax with ES6 generators, let's walk through the behavior flow:

1. The `it = foo()` operation does *not* execute the `*foo()` generator yet, but it merely constructs an *iterator* that will control its execution. More on *iterators* in a bit.
2. The first `it.next()` starts the `*foo()` generator, and runs the `x++` on the first line of `*foo()`.
3. `*foo()` pauses at the `yield` statement, at which point that first `it.next()` call finishes. At the moment, `*foo()` is still running and active, but it's in a paused state.
4. We inspect the value of `x`, and it's now `2`.
5. We call `bar()`, which increments `x` again with `x++`.
6. We inspect the value of `x` again, and it's now `3`.
7. The final `it.next()` call resumes the `*foo()` generator from where it was paused, and runs the `console.log(..)` statement, which uses the current value of `x` of `3`.

Clearly, `*foo()` started, but did *not* run-to-completion -- it paused at the `yield`. We resumed `*foo()` later, and let it finish, but that wasn't even required.

So, a generator is a special kind of function that can start and stop one or more times, and doesn't necessarily ever have to finish. While it won't be terribly obvious yet why that's so powerful, as we go throughout the rest of this chapter, that will be one of the fundamental building blocks we use to construct generators-as-async-flow-control as a pattern for our code.

### Input and Output

A generator function is a special function with the new processing model we just alluded to. But it's still a function, which means it still has some basic tenets that haven't changed -- namely, that it still accepts arguments (aka "input"), and that it can still return a value (aka "output"):

```js
function *foo(x,y) {
	return x * y;
}

var it = foo( 6, 7 );

var res = it.next();

res.value;		// 42
```

We pass in the arguments `6` and `7` to `*foo(..)` as the parameters `x` and `y`, respectively. And `*foo(..)` returns the value `42` back to the calling code.

We now see a difference with how the generator is invoked compared to a normal function. `foo(6,7)` obviously looks familiar. But subtly, the `*foo(..)` generator hasn't actually run yet as it would have with a function.

Instead, we're just creating an *iterator* object, which we assign to the variable `it`, to control the `*foo(..)` generator. Then we call `it.next()`, which instructs the `*foo(..)` generator to advance from its current location, stopping either at the next `yield` or end of the generator.

The result of that `next(..)` call is an object with a `value` property on it holding whatever value (if anything) was returned from `*foo(..)`. In other words, `yield` caused a value to be sent out from the generator during the middle of its execution, kind of like an intermediate `return`.

Again, it won't be obvious yet why we need this whole indirect *iterator* object to control the generator. We'll get there, I *promise*.

#### Iteration Messaging

In addition to generators accepting arguments and having return values, there's even more powerful and compelling input/output messaging capability built into them, via `yield` and `next(..)`.

Consider:

```js
function *foo(x) {
	var y = x * (yield);
	return y;
}

var it = foo( 6 );

// start `foo(..)`
it.next();

var res = it.next( 7 );

res.value;		// 42
```

First, we pass in `6` as the parameter `x`. Then we call `it.next()`, and it starts up `*foo(..)`.

Inside `*foo(..)`, the `var y = x ..` statement starts to be processed, but then it runs across a `yield` expression. At that point, it pauses `*foo(..)` (in the middle of the assignment statement!), and essentially requests the calling code to provide a result value for the `yield` expression. Next, we call `it.next( 7 )`, which is passing the `7` value back in to *be* that result of the paused `yield` expression.

So, at this point, the assignment statement is essentially `var y = 6 * 7`. Now, `return y` returns that `42` value back as the result of the `it.next( 7 )` call.

Notice something very important but also easily confusing, even to seasoned JS developers: depending on your perspective, there's a mismatch between the `yield` and the `next(..)` call. In general, you're going to have one more `next(..)` call than you have `yield` statements -- the preceding snippet has one `yield` and two `next(..)` calls.

Why the mismatch?

Because the first `next(..)` always starts a generator, and runs to the first `yield`. But it's the second `next(..)` call that fulfills the first paused `yield` expression, and the third `next(..)` would fulfill the second `yield`, and so on.

##### Tale of Two Questions

Actually, which code you're thinking about primarily will affect whether there's a perceived mismatch or not.

Consider only the generator code:

```js
var y = x * (yield);
return y;
```

This **first** `yield` is basically *asking a question*: "What value should I insert here?"

Who's going to answer that question? Well, the **first** `next()` has already run to get the generator up to this point, so obviously *it* can't answer the question. So, the **second** `next(..)` call must answer the question *posed* by the **first** `yield`.

See the mismatch -- second-to-first?

But let's flip our perspective. Let's look at it not from the generator's point of view, but from the iterator's point of view.

To properly illustrate this perspective, we also need to explain that messages can go in both directions -- `yield ..` as an expression can send out messages in response to `next(..)` calls, and `next(..)` can send values to a paused `yield` expression. Consider this slightly adjusted code:

```js
function *foo(x) {
	var y = x * (yield "Hello");	// <-- yield a value!
	return y;
}

var it = foo( 6 );

var res = it.next();	// first `next()`, don't pass anything
res.value;				// "Hello"

res = it.next( 7 );		// pass `7` to waiting `yield`
res.value;				// 42
```

`yield ..` and `next(..)` pair together as a two-way message passing system **during the execution of the generator**.

So, looking only at the *iterator* code:

```js
var res = it.next();	// first `next()`, don't pass anything
res.value;				// "Hello"

res = it.next( 7 );		// pass `7` to waiting `yield`
res.value;				// 42
```

**Note:** We don't pass a value to the first `next()` call, and that's on purpose. Only a paused `yield` could accept such a value passed by a `next(..)`, and at the beginning of the generator when we call the first `next()`, there **is no paused `yield`** to accept such a value. The specification and all compliant browsers just silently **discard** anything passed to the first `next()`. It's still a bad idea to pass a value, as you're just creating silently "failing" code that's confusing. So, always start a generator with an argument-free `next()`.

The first `next()` call (with nothing passed to it) is basically *asking a question*: "What *next* value does the `*foo(..)` generator have to give me?" And who answers this question? The first `yield "hello"` expression.

See? No mismatch there.

Depending on *who* you think about asking the question, there is either a mismatch between the `yield` and `next(..)` calls, or not.

But wait! There's still an extra `next()` compared to the number of `yield` statements. So, that final `it.next(7)` call is again asking the question about what *next* value the generator will produce. But there's no more `yield` statements left to answer, is there? So who answers?

The `return` statement answers the question!

And if there **is no `return`** in your generator -- `return` is certainly not any more required in generators than in regular functions -- there's always an assumed/implicit `return;` (aka `return undefined;`), which serves the purpose of default answering the question *posed* by the final `it.next(7)` call.

These questions and answers -- the two-way message passing with `yield` and `next(..)` -- are quite powerful, but it's not obvious at all how these mechanisms are connected to async flow control. We're getting there!

### Multiple Iterators

It may appear from the syntactic usage that when you use an *iterator* to control a generator, you're controlling the declared generator function itself. But there's a subtlety that's easy to miss: each time you construct an *iterator*, you are implicitly constructing an instance of the generator which that *iterator* will control.

You can have multiple instances of the same generator running at the same time, and they can even interact:

```js
function *foo() {
	var x = yield 2;
	z++;
	var y = yield (x * z);
	console.log( x, y, z );
}

var z = 1;

var it1 = foo();
var it2 = foo();

var val1 = it1.next().value;			// 2 <-- yield 2
var val2 = it2.next().value;			// 2 <-- yield 2

val1 = it1.next( val2 * 10 ).value;		// 40  <-- x:20,  z:2
val2 = it2.next( val1 * 5 ).value;		// 600 <-- x:200, z:3

it1.next( val2 / 2 );					// y:300
										// 20 300 3
it2.next( val1 / 4 );					// y:10
										// 200 10 3
```

**Warning:** The most common usage of multiple instances of the same generator running concurrently is not such interactions, but when the generator is producing its own values without input, perhaps from some independently connected resource. We'll talk more about value production in the next section.

Let's briefly walk through the processing:

1. Both instances of `*foo()` are started at the same time, and both `next()` calls reveal a `value` of `2` from the `yield 2` statements, respectively.
2. `val2 * 10` is `2 * 10`, which is sent into the first generator instance `it1`, so that `x` gets value `20`. `z` is incremented from `1` to `2`, and then `20 * 2` is `yield`ed out, setting `val1` to `40`.
3. `val1 * 5` is `40 * 5`, which is sent into the second generator instance `it2`, so that `x` gets value `200`. `z` is incremented again, from `2` to `3`, and then `200 * 3` is `yield`ed out, setting `val2` to `600`.
4. `val2 / 2` is `600 / 2`, which is sent into the first generator instance `it1`, so that `y` gets value `300`, then printing out `20 300 3` for its `x y z` values, respectively.
5. `val1 / 4` is `40 / 4`, which is sent into the second generator instance `it2`, so that `y` gets value `10`, then printing out `200 10 3` for its `x y z` values, respectively.

That's a "fun" example to run through in your mind. Did you keep it straight?

#### Interleaving

Recall this scenario from the "Run-to-completion" section of Chapter 1:

```js
var a = 1;
var b = 2;

function foo() {
	a++;
	b = b * a;
	a = b + 3;
}

function bar() {
	b--;
	a = 8 + b;
	b = a * 2;
}
```

With normal JS functions, of course either `foo()` can run completely first, or `bar()` can run completely first, but `foo()` cannot interleave its individual statements with `bar()`. So, there are only two possible outcomes to the preceding program.

However, with generators, clearly interleaving (even in the middle of statements!) is possible:

```js
var a = 1;
var b = 2;

function *foo() {
	a++;
	yield;
	b = b * a;
	a = (yield b) + 3;
}

function *bar() {
	b--;
	yield;
	a = (yield 8) + b;
	b = a * (yield 2);
}
```

Depending on what respective order the *iterators* controlling `*foo()` and `*bar()` are called, the preceding program could produce several different results. In other words, we can actually illustrate (in a sort of fake-ish way) the theoretical "threaded race conditions" circumstances discussed in Chapter 1, by interleaving the two generator iterations over the same shared variables.

First, let's make a helper called `step(..)` that controls an *iterator*:

```js
function step(gen) {
	var it = gen();
	var last;

	return function() {
		// whatever is `yield`ed out, just
		// send it right back in the next time!
		last = it.next( last ).value;
	};
}
```

`step(..)` initializes a generator to create its `it` *iterator*, then returns a function which, when called, advances the *iterator* by one step. Additionally, the previously `yield`ed out value is sent right back in at the *next* step. So, `yield 8` will just become `8` and `yield b` will just be `b` (whatever it was at the time of `yield`).

Now, just for fun, let's experiment to see the effects of interleaving these different chunks of `*foo()` and `*bar()`. We'll start with the boring base case, making sure `*foo()` totally finishes before `*bar()` (just like we did in Chapter 1):

```js
// make sure to reset `a` and `b`
a = 1;
b = 2;

var s1 = step( foo );
var s2 = step( bar );

// run `*foo()` completely first
s1();
s1();
s1();

// now run `*bar()`
s2();
s2();
s2();
s2();

console.log( a, b );	// 11 22
```

The end result is `11` and `22`, just as it was in the Chapter 1 version. Now let's mix up the interleaving ordering and see how it changes the final values of `a` and `b`:

```js
// make sure to reset `a` and `b`
a = 1;
b = 2;

var s1 = step( foo );
var s2 = step( bar );

s2();		// b--;
s2();		// yield 8
s1();		// a++;
s2();		// a = 8 + b;
			// yield 2
s1();		// b = b * a;
			// yield b
s1();		// a = b + 3;
s2();		// b = a * 2;
```

Before I tell you the results, can you figure out what `a` and `b` are after the preceding program? No cheating!

```js
console.log( a, b );	// 12 18
```

**Note:** As an exercise for the reader, try to see how many other combinations of results you can get back rearranging the order of the `s1()` and `s2()` calls. Don't forget you'll always need three `s1()` calls and four `s2()` calls. Recall the discussion earlier about matching `next()` with `yield` for the reasons why.

You almost certainly won't want to intentionally create *this* level of interleaving confusion, as it creates incredibly difficult to understand code. But the exercise is interesting and instructive to understand more about how multiple generators can run concurrently in the same shared scope, because there will be places where this capability is quite useful.

We'll discuss generator concurrency in more detail at the end of this chapter.

## Generator'ing Values

In the previous section, we mentioned an interesting use for generators, as a way to produce values. This is **not** the main focus in this chapter, but we'd be remiss if we didn't cover the basics, especially because this use case is essentially the origin of the name: generators.

We're going to take a slight diversion into the topic of *iterators* for a bit, but we'll circle back to how they relate to generators and using a generator to *generate* values.

### Producers and Iterators

Imagine you're producing a series of values where each value has a definable relationship to the previous value. To do this, you're going to need a stateful producer that remembers the last value it gave out.

You can implement something like that straightforwardly using a function closure (see the *Scope & Closures* title of this series):

```js
var gimmeSomething = (function(){
	var nextVal;

	return function(){
		if (nextVal === undefined) {
			nextVal = 1;
		}
		else {
			nextVal = (3 * nextVal) + 6;
		}

		return nextVal;
	};
})();

gimmeSomething();		// 1
gimmeSomething();		// 9
gimmeSomething();		// 33
gimmeSomething();		// 105
```

**Note:** The `nextVal` computation logic here could have been simplified, but conceptually, we don't want to calculate the *next value* (aka `nextVal`) until the *next* `gimmeSomething()` call happens, because in general that could be a resource-leaky design for producers of more persistent or resource-limited values than simple `number`s.

Generating an arbitrary number series isn't a terribly realistic example. But what if you were generating records from a data source? You could imagine much the same code.

In fact, this task is a very common design pattern, usually solved by iterators. An *iterator* is a well-defined interface for stepping through a series of values from a producer. The JS interface for iterators, as it is in most languages, is to call `next()` each time you want the next value from the producer.

We could implement the standard *iterator* interface for our number series producer:

```js
var something = (function(){
	var nextVal;

	return {
		// needed for `for..of` loops
		[Symbol.iterator]: function(){ return this; },

		// standard iterator interface method
		next: function(){
			if (nextVal === undefined) {
				nextVal = 1;
			}
			else {
				nextVal = (3 * nextVal) + 6;
			}

			return { done:false, value:nextVal };
		}
	};
})();

something.next().value;		// 1
something.next().value;		// 9
something.next().value;		// 33
something.next().value;		// 105
```

**Note:** We'll explain why we need the `[Symbol.iterator]: ..` part of this code snippet in the "Iterables" section. Syntactically though, two ES6 features are at play. First, the `[ .. ]` syntax is called a *computed property name* (see the *this & Object Prototypes* title of this series). It's a way in an object literal definition to specify an expression and use the result of that expression as the name for the property. Next, `Symbol.iterator` is one of ES6's predefined special `Symbol` values (see the *ES6 & Beyond* title of this book series).

The `next()` call returns an object with two properties: `done` is a `boolean` value signaling the *iterator's* complete status; `value` holds the iteration value.

ES6 also adds the `for..of` loop, which means that a standard *iterator* can automatically be consumed with native loop syntax:

```js
for (var v of something) {
	console.log( v );

	// don't let the loop run forever!
	if (v > 500) {
		break;
	}
}
// 1 9 33 105 321 969
```

**Note:** Because our `something` *iterator* always returns `done:false`, this `for..of` loop would run forever, which is why we put the `break` conditional in. It's totally OK for iterators to be never-ending, but there are also cases where the *iterator* will run over a finite set of values and eventually return a `done:true`.

The `for..of` loop automatically calls `next()` for each iteration -- it doesn't pass any values in to the `next()` -- and it will automatically terminate on receiving a `done:true`. It's quite handy for looping over a set of data.

Of course, you could manually loop over iterators, calling `next()` and checking for the `done:true` condition to know when to stop:

```js
for (
	var ret;
	(ret = something.next()) && !ret.done;
) {
	console.log( ret.value );

	// don't let the loop run forever!
	if (ret.value > 500) {
		break;
	}
}
// 1 9 33 105 321 969
```

**Note:** This manual `for` approach is certainly uglier than the ES6 `for..of` loop syntax, but its advantage is that it affords you the opportunity to pass in values to the `next(..)` calls if necessary.

In addition to making your own *iterators*, many built-in data structures in JS (as of ES6), like `array`s, also have default *iterators*:

```js
var a = [1,3,5,7,9];

for (var v of a) {
	console.log( v );
}
// 1 3 5 7 9
```

The `for..of` loop asks `a` for its *iterator*, and automatically uses it to iterate over `a`'s values.

**Note:** It may seem a strange omission by ES6, but regular `object`s intentionally do not come with a default *iterator* the way `array`s do. The reasons go deeper than we will cover here. If all you want is to iterate over the properties of an object (with no particular guarantee of ordering), `Object.keys(..)` returns an `array`, which can then be used like `for (var k of Object.keys(obj)) { ..`. Such a `for..of` loop over an object's keys would be similar to a `for..in` loop, except that `Object.keys(..)` does not include properties from the `[[Prototype]]` chain while `for..in` does (see the *this & Object Prototypes* title of this series).

### Iterables

The `something` object in our running example is called an *iterator*, as it has the `next()` method on its interface. But a closely related term is *iterable*, which is an `object` that **contains** an *iterator* that can iterate over its values.

As of ES6, the way to retrieve an *iterator* from an *iterable* is that the *iterable* must have a function on it, with the name being the special ES6 symbol value `Symbol.iterator`. When this function is called, it returns an *iterator*. Though not required, generally each call should return a fresh new *iterator*.

`a` in the previous snippet is an *iterable*. The `for..of` loop automatically calls its `Symbol.iterator` function to construct an *iterator*. But we could of course call the function manually, and use the *iterator* it returns:

```js
var a = [1,3,5,7,9];

var it = a[Symbol.iterator]();

it.next().value;	// 1
it.next().value;	// 3
it.next().value;	// 5
..
```

In the previous code listing that defined `something`, you may have noticed this line:

```js
[Symbol.iterator]: function(){ return this; }
```

That little bit of confusing code is making the `something` value -- the interface of the `something` *iterator* -- also an *iterable*; it's now both an *iterable* and an *iterator*. Then, we pass `something` to the `for..of` loop:

```js
for (var v of something) {
	..
}
```

The `for..of` loop expects `something` to be an *iterable*, so it looks for and calls its `Symbol.iterator` function. We defined that function to simply `return this`, so it just gives itself back, and the `for..of` loop is none the wiser.

### Generator Iterator

Let's turn our attention back to generators, in the context of *iterators*. A generator can be treated as a producer of values that we extract one at a time through an *iterator* interface's `next()` calls.

So, a generator itself is not technically an *iterable*, though it's very similar -- when you execute the generator, you get an *iterator* back:

```js
function *foo(){ .. }

var it = foo();
```

We can implement the `something` infinite number series producer from earlier with a generator, like this:

```js
function *something() {
	var nextVal;

	while (true) {
		if (nextVal === undefined) {
			nextVal = 1;
		}
		else {
			nextVal = (3 * nextVal) + 6;
		}

		yield nextVal;
	}
}
```

**Note:** A `while..true` loop would normally be a very bad thing to include in a real JS program, at least if it doesn't have a `break` or `return` in it, as it would likely run forever, synchronously, and block/lock-up the browser UI. However, in a generator, such a loop is generally totally OK if it has a `yield` in it, as the generator will pause at each iteration, `yield`ing back to the main program and/or to the event loop queue. To put it glibly, "generators put the `while..true` back in JS programming!"

That's a fair bit cleaner and simpler, right? Because the generator pauses at each `yield`, the state (scope) of the function `*something()` is kept around, meaning there's no need for the closure boilerplate to preserve variable state across calls.

Not only is it simpler code -- we don't have to make our own *iterator* interface -- it actually is more reason-able code, because it more clearly expresses the intent. For example, the `while..true` loop tells us the generator is intended to run forever -- to keep *generating* values as long as we keep asking for them.

And now we can use our shiny new `*something()` generator with a `for..of` loop, and you'll see it works basically identically:

```js
for (var v of something()) {
	console.log( v );

	// don't let the loop run forever!
	if (v > 500) {
		break;
	}
}
// 1 9 33 105 321 969
```

But don't skip over `for (var v of something()) ..`! We didn't just reference `something` as a value like in earlier examples, but instead called the `*something()` generator to get its *iterator* for the `for..of` loop to use.

If you're paying close attention, two questions may arise from this interaction between the generator and the loop:

* Why couldn't we say `for (var v of something) ..`? Because `something` here is a generator, which is not an *iterable*. We have to call `something()` to construct a producer for the `for..of` loop to iterate over.
* The `something()` call produces an *iterator*, but the `for..of` loop wants an *iterable*, right? Yep. The generator's *iterator* also has a `Symbol.iterator` function on it, which basically does a `return this`, just like the `something` *iterable* we defined earlier. In other words, a generator's *iterator* is also an *iterable*!

#### Stopping the Generator

In the previous example, it would appear the *iterator* instance for the `*something()` generator was basically left in a suspended state forever after the `break` in the loop was called.

But there's a hidden behavior that takes care of that for you. "Abnormal completion" (i.e., "early termination") of the `for..of` loop -- generally caused by a `break`, `return`, or an uncaught exception -- sends a signal to the generator's *iterator* for it to terminate.

**Note:** Technically, the `for..of` loop also sends this signal to the *iterator* at the normal completion of the loop. For a generator, that's essentially a moot operation, as the generator's *iterator* had to complete first so the `for..of` loop completed. However, custom *iterators* might desire to receive this additional signal from `for..of` loop consumers.

While a `for..of` loop will automatically send this signal, you may wish to send the signal manually to an *iterator*; you do this by calling `return(..)`.

If you specify a `try..finally` clause inside the generator, it will always be run even when the generator is externally completed. This is useful if you need to clean up resources (database connections, etc.):

```js
function *something() {
	try {
		var nextVal;

		while (true) {
			if (nextVal === undefined) {
				nextVal = 1;
			}
			else {
				nextVal = (3 * nextVal) + 6;
			}

			yield nextVal;
		}
	}
	// cleanup clause
	finally {
		console.log( "cleaning up!" );
	}
}
```

The earlier example with `break` in the `for..of` loop will trigger the `finally` clause. But you could instead manually terminate the generator's *iterator* instance from the outside with `return(..)`:

```js
var it = something();
for (var v of it) {
	console.log( v );

	// don't let the loop run forever!
	if (v > 500) {
		console.log(
			// complete the generator's iterator
			it.return( "Hello World" ).value
		);
		// no `break` needed here
	}
}
// 1 9 33 105 321 969
// cleaning up!
// Hello World
```

When we call `it.return(..)`, it immediately terminates the generator, which of course runs the `finally` clause. Also, it sets the returned `value` to whatever you passed in to `return(..)`, which is how `"Hello World"` comes right back out. We also don't need to include a `break` now because the generator's *iterator* is set to `done:true`, so the `for..of` loop will terminate on its next iteration.

Generators owe their namesake mostly to this *consuming produced values* use. But again, that's just one of the uses for generators, and frankly not even the main one we're concerned with in the context of this book.

But now that we more fully understand some of the mechanics of how they work, we can *next* turn our attention to how generators apply to async concurrency.

## Iterating Generators Asynchronously

What do generators have to do with async coding patterns, fixing problems with callbacks, and the like? Let's get to answering that important question.

We should revisit one of our scenarios from Chapter 3. Let's recall the callback approach:

```js
function foo(x,y,cb) {
	ajax(
		"http://some.url.1/?x=" + x + "&y=" + y,
		cb
	);
}

foo( 11, 31, function(err,text) {
	if (err) {
		console.error( err );
	}
	else {
		console.log( text );
	}
} );
```

If we wanted to express this same task flow control with a generator, we could do:

```js
function foo(x,y) {
	ajax(
		"http://some.url.1/?x=" + x + "&y=" + y,
		function(err,data){
			if (err) {
				// throw an error into `*main()`
				it.throw( err );
			}
			else {
				// resume `*main()` with received `data`
				it.next( data );
			}
		}
	);
}

function *main() {
	try {
		var text = yield foo( 11, 31 );
		console.log( text );
	}
	catch (err) {
		console.error( err );
	}
}

var it = main();

// start it all up!
it.next();
```

At first glance, this snippet is longer, and perhaps a little more complex looking, than the callback snippet before it. But don't let that impression get you off track. The generator snippet is actually **much** better! But there's a lot going on for us to explain.

First, let's look at this part of the code, which is the most important:

```js
var text = yield foo( 11, 31 );
console.log( text );
```

Think about how that code works for a moment. We're calling a normal function `foo(..)` and we're apparently able to get back the `text` from the Ajax call, even though it's asynchronous.

How is that possible? If you recall the beginning of Chapter 1, we had almost identical code:

```js
var data = ajax( "..url 1.." );
console.log( data );
```

And that code didn't work! Can you spot the difference? It's the `yield` used in a generator.

That's the magic! That's what allows us to have what appears to be blocking, synchronous code, but it doesn't actually block the whole program; it only pauses/blocks the code in the generator itself.

In `yield foo(11,31)`, first the `foo(11,31)` call is made, which returns nothing (aka `undefined`), so we're making a call to request data, but we're actually then doing `yield undefined`. That's OK, because the code is not currently relying on a `yield`ed value to do anything interesting. We'll revisit this point later in the chapter.

We're not using `yield` in a message passing sense here, only in a flow control sense to pause/block. Actually, it will have message passing, but only in one direction, after the generator is resumed.

So, the generator pauses at the `yield`, essentially asking the question, "what value should I return to assign to the variable `text`?" Who's going to answer that question?

Look at `foo(..)`. If the Ajax request is successful, we call:

```js
it.next( data );
```

That's resuming the generator with the response data, which means that our paused `yield` expression receives that value directly, and then as it restarts the generator code, that value gets assigned to the local variable `text`.

Pretty cool, huh?

Take a step back and consider the implications. We have totally synchronous-looking code inside the generator (other than the `yield` keyword itself), but hidden behind the scenes, inside of `foo(..)`, the operations can complete asynchronously.

**That's huge!** That's a nearly perfect solution to our previously stated problem with callbacks not being able to express asynchrony in a sequential, synchronous fashion that our brains can relate to.

In essence, we are abstracting the asynchrony away as an implementation detail, so that we can reason synchronously/sequentially about our flow control: "Make an Ajax request, and when it finishes print out the response." And of course, we just expressed two steps in the flow control, but this same capability extends without bounds, to let us express however many steps we need to.

**Tip:** This is such an important realization, just go back and read the last three paragraphs again to let it sink in!

### Synchronous Error Handling

But the preceding generator code has even more goodness to *yield* to us. Let's turn our attention to the `try..catch` inside the generator:

```js
try {
	var text = yield foo( 11, 31 );
	console.log( text );
}
catch (err) {
	console.error( err );
}
```

How does this work? The `foo(..)` call is asynchronously completing, and doesn't `try..catch` fail to catch asynchronous errors, as we looked at in Chapter 3?

We already saw how the `yield` lets the assignment statement pause to wait for `foo(..)` to finish, so that the completed response can be assigned to `text`. The awesome part is that this `yield` pausing *also* allows the generator to `catch` an error. We throw that error into the generator with this part of the earlier code listing:

```js
if (err) {
	// throw an error into `*main()`
	it.throw( err );
}
```

The `yield`-pause nature of generators means that not only do we get synchronous-looking `return` values from async function calls, but we can also synchronously `catch` errors from those async function calls!

So we've seen we can throw errors *into* a generator, but what about throwing errors *out of* a generator? Exactly as you'd expect:

```js
function *main() {
	var x = yield "Hello World";

	yield x.toLowerCase();	// cause an exception!
}

var it = main();

it.next().value;			// Hello World

try {
	it.next( 42 );
}
catch (err) {
	console.error( err );	// TypeError
}
```

Of course, we could have manually thrown an error with `throw ..` instead of causing an exception.

We can even `catch` the same error that we `throw(..)` into the generator, essentially giving the generator a chance to handle it but if it doesn't, the *iterator* code must handle it:

```js
function *main() {
	var x = yield "Hello World";

	// never gets here
	console.log( x );
}

var it = main();

it.next();

try {
	// will `*main()` handle this error? we'll see!
	it.throw( "Oops" );
}
catch (err) {
	// nope, didn't handle it!
	console.error( err );			// Oops
}
```

Synchronous-looking error handling (via `try..catch`) with async code is a huge win for readability and reason-ability.

