# You Don't Know JS: ES6 & Beyond
# Chapter 2: Syntax

If you've been writing JS for any length of time, odds are the syntax is pretty familiar to you. There are certainly many quirks, but overall it's a fairly reasonable and straightforward syntax that draws many similarities from other languages.

However, ES6 adds quite a few new syntactic forms that take some getting used to. In this chapter, we'll tour through them to find out what's in store.

**Tip:** At the time of this writing, some of the features discussed in this book have been implemented in various browsers (Firefox, Chrome, etc.), but some have only been partially implemented and many others have not been implemented at all. Your experience may be mixed trying these examples directly. If so, try them out with transpilers, as most of these features are covered by those tools. ES6Fiddle (http://www.es6fiddle.net/) is a great, easy-to-use playground for trying out ES6, as is the online REPL for the Babel transpiler (http://babeljs.io/repl/).

## Block-Scoped Declarations

You're probably aware that the fundamental unit of variable scoping in JavaScript has always been the `function`. If you needed to create a block of scope, the most prevalent way to do so other than a regular function declaration was the immediately invoked function expression (IIFE). For example:

```js
var a = 2;

(function IIFE(){
	var a = 3;
	console.log( a );	// 3
})();

console.log( a );		// 2
```

### `let` Declarations

However, we can now create declarations that are bound to any block, called (unsurprisingly) *block scoping*. This means all we need is a pair of `{ .. }` to create a scope. Instead of using `var`, which always declares variables attached to the enclosing function (or global, if top level) scope, use `let`:

```js
var a = 2;

{
	let a = 3;
	console.log( a );	// 3
}

console.log( a );		// 2
```

It's not very common or idiomatic thus far in JS to use a standalone `{ .. }` block, but it's always been valid. And developers from other languages that have *block scoping* will readily recognize that pattern.

I believe this is the best way to create block-scoped variables, with a dedicated `{ .. }` block. Moreover, you should always put the `let` declaration(s) at the very top of that block. If you have more than one to declare, I'd recommend using just one `let`.

Stylistically, I even prefer to put the `let` on the same line as the opening `{`, to make it clearer that this block is only for the purpose of declaring the scope for those variables.

```js
{	let a = 2, b, c;
	// ..
}
```

Now, that's going to look strange and it's not likely going to match the recommendations given in most other ES6 literature. But I have reasons for my madness.

There's another experimental (not standardized) form of the `let` declaration called the `let`-block, which looks like:

```js
let (a = 2, b, c) {
	// ..
}
```

That form is what I call *explicit* block scoping, whereas the `let ..` declaration form that mirrors `var` is more *implicit*, as it kind of hijacks whatever `{ .. }` pair it's found in. Generally developers find *explicit* mechanisms a bit more preferable than *implicit* mechanisms, and I claim this is one of those cases.

If you compare the previous two snippet forms, they're very similar, and in my opinion both qualify stylistically as *explicit* block scoping. Unfortunately, the `let (..) { .. }` form, the most *explicit* of the options, was not adopted in ES6. That may be revisited post-ES6, but for now the former option is our best bet, I think.

To reinforce the *implicit* nature of `let ..` declarations, consider these usages:

```js
let a = 2;

if (a > 1) {
	let b = a * 3;
	console.log( b );		// 6

	for (let i = a; i <= b; i++) {
		let j = i + 10;
		console.log( j );
	}
	// 12 13 14 15 16

	let c = a + b;
	console.log( c );		// 8
}
```

Quick quiz without looking back at that snippet: which variable(s) exist only inside the `if` statement, and which variable(s) exist only inside the `for` loop?

The answers: the `if` statement contains `b` and `c` block-scoped variables, and the `for` loop contains `i` and `j` block-scoped variables.

Did you have to think about it for a moment? Does it surprise you that `i` isn't added to the enclosing `if` statement scope? That mental pause and questioning -- I call it a "mental tax" -- comes from the fact that this `let` mechanism is not only new to us, but it's also *implicit*.

There's also hazard in the `let c = ..` declaration appearing so far down in the scope. Unlike traditional `var`-declared variables, which are attached to the entire enclosing function scope regardless of where they appear, `let` declarations attach to the block scope but are not initialized until they appear in the block.

Accessing a `let`-declared variable earlier than its `let ..` declaration/initialization causes an error, whereas with `var` declarations the ordering doesn't matter (except stylistically).

Consider:

```js
{
	console.log( a );	// undefined
	console.log( b );	// ReferenceError!

	var a;
	let b;
}
```

**Warning:** This `ReferenceError` from accessing too-early `let`-declared references is technically called a *Temporal Dead Zone (TDZ)* error -- you're accessing a variable that's been declared but not yet initialized. This will not be the only time we see TDZ errors -- they crop up in several places in ES6. Also, note that "initialized" doesn't require explicitly assigning a value in your code, as `let b;` is totally valid. A variable that's not given an assignment at declaration time is assumed to have been assigned the `undefined` value, so `let b;` is the same as `let b = undefined;`. Explicit assignment or not, you cannot access `b` until the `let b` statement is run.

One last gotcha: `typeof` behaves differently with TDZ variables than it does with undeclared (or declared!) variables. For example:

```js
{
	// `a` is not declared
	if (typeof a === "undefined") {
		console.log( "cool" );
	}

	// `b` is declared, but in its TDZ
	if (typeof b === "undefined") {		// ReferenceError!
		// ..
	}

	// ..

	let b;
}
```

The `a` is not declared, so `typeof` is the only safe way to check for its existence or not. But `typeof b` throws the TDZ error because farther down in the code there happens to be a `let b` declaration. Oops.

Now it should be clearer why I insist that `let` declarations should all be at the top of their scope. That totally avoids the accidental errors of accessing too early. It also makes it more *explicit* when you look at the start of a block, any block, what variables it contains.

Your blocks (`if` statements, `while` loops, etc.) don't have to share their original behavior with scoping behavior.

This explicitness on your part, which is up to you to maintain with discipline, will save you lots of refactor headaches and footguns down the line.

**Note:** For more information on `let` and block scoping, see Chapter 3 of the *Scope & Closures* title of this series.

#### `let` + `for`

The only exception I'd make to the preference for the *explicit* form of `let` declaration blocking is a `let` that appears in the header of a `for` loop. The reason may seem nuanced, but I believe it to be one of the more important ES6 features.

Consider:

```js
var funcs = [];

for (let i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
	funcs.push( function(){
		console.log( i );
	} );
}

funcs[3]();		// 3
```

The `let i` in the `for` header declares an `i` not just for the `for` loop itself, but it redeclares a new `i` for each iteration of the loop. That means that closures created inside the loop iteration close over those per-iteration variables the way you'd expect.

If you tried that same snippet but with `var i` in the `for` loop header, you'd get `5` instead of `3`, because there'd only be one `i` in the outer scope that was closed over, instead of a new `i` for each iteration's function to close over.

You could also have accomplished the same thing slightly more verbosely:

```js
var funcs = [];

for (var i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
	let j = i;
	funcs.push( function(){
		console.log( j );
	} );
}

funcs[3]();		// 3
```

Here, we forcibly create a new `j` for each iteration, and then the closure works the same way. I prefer the former approach; that extra special capability is why I endorse the `for (let .. ) ..` form. It could be argued it's somewhat more *implicit*, but it's *explicit* enough, and useful enough, for my tastes.

`let` also works the same way with `for..in` and `for..of` loops (see "`for..of` Loops").

### `const` Declarations

There's one other form of block-scoped declaration to consider: the `const`, which creates *constants*.

What exactly is a constant? It's a variable that's read-only after its initial value is set. Consider:

```js
{
	const a = 2;
	console.log( a );	// 2

	a = 3;				// TypeError!
}
```

You are not allowed to change the value the variable holds once it's been set, at declaration time. A `const` declaration must have an explicit initialization. If you wanted a *constant* with the `undefined` value, you'd have to declare `const a = undefined` to get it.

Constants are not a restriction on the value itself, but on the variable's assignment of that value. In other words, the value is not frozen or immutable because of `const`, just the assignment of it. If the value is complex, such as an object or array, the contents of the value can still be modified:

```js
{
	const a = [1,2,3];
	a.push( 4 );
	console.log( a );		// [1,2,3,4]

	a = 42;					// TypeError!
}
```

The `a` variable doesn't actually hold a constant array; rather, it holds a constant reference to the array. The array itself is freely mutable.

**Warning:** Assigning an object or array as a constant means that value will not be able to be garbage collected until that constant's lexical scope goes away, as the reference to the value can never be unset. That may be desirable, but be careful if it's not your intent!

Essentially, `const` declarations enforce what we've stylistically signaled with our code for years, where we declared a variable name of all uppercase letters and assigned it some literal value that we took care never to change. There's no enforcement on a `var` assignment, but there is now with a `const` assignment, which can help you catch unintended changes.

`const` *can* be used with variable declarations of `for`, `for..in`, and `for..of` loops (see "`for..of` Loops"). However, an error will be thrown if there's any attempt to reassign, such as the typical `i++` clause of a `for` loop.

#### `const` Or Not

There's some rumored assumptions that a `const` could be more optimizable by the JS engine in certain scenarios than a `let` or `var` would be. Theoretically, the engine more easily knows the variable's value/type will never change, so it can eliminate some possible tracking.

Whether `const` really helps here or this is just our own fantasies and intuitions, the much more important decision to make is if you intend constant behavior or not. Remember: one of the most important roles for source code is to communicate clearly, not only to you, but your future self and other code collaborators, what your intent is.

Some developers prefer to start out every variable declaration as a `const` and then relax a declaration back to a `let` if it becomes necessary for its value to change in the code. This is an interesting perspective, but it's not clear that it genuinely improves the readability or reason-ability of code.

It's not really a *protection*, as many believe, because any later developer who wants to change a value of a `const` can just blindly change `const` to `let` on the declaration. At best, it protects accidental change. But again, other than our intuitions and sensibilities, there doesn't appear to be objective and clear measure of what constitutes "accidents" or prevention thereof. Similar mindsets exist around type enforcement.

My advice: to avoid potentially confusing code, only use `const` for variables that you're intentionally and obviously signaling will not change. In other words, don't *rely on* `const` for code behavior, but instead use it as a tool for signaling intent, when intent can be signaled clearly.

### Block-scoped Functions

Starting with ES6, function declarations that occur inside of blocks are now specified to be scoped to that block. Prior to ES6, the specification did not call for this, but many implementations did it anyway. So now the specification meets reality.

Consider:

```js
{
	foo();					// works!

	function foo() {
		// ..
	}
}

foo();						// ReferenceError
```

The `foo()` function is declared inside the `{ .. }` block, and as of ES6 is block-scoped there. So it's not available outside that block. But also note that it is "hoisted" within the block, as opposed to `let` declarations, which suffer the TDZ error trap mentioned earlier.

Block-scoping of function declarations could be a problem if you've ever written code like this before, and relied on the old legacy non-block-scoped behavior:

```js
if (something) {
	function foo() {
		console.log( "1" );
	}
}
else {
	function foo() {
		console.log( "2" );
	}
}

foo();		// ??
```

In pre-ES6 environments, `foo()` would print `"2"` regardless of the value of `something`, because both function declarations were hoisted out of the blocks, and the second one always wins.

In ES6, that last line throws a `ReferenceError`.

## Spread/Rest

ES6 introduces a new `...` operator that's typically referred to as the *spread* or *rest* operator, depending on where/how it's used. Let's take a look:

```js
function foo(x,y,z) {
	console.log( x, y, z );
}

foo( ...[1,2,3] );				// 1 2 3
```

When `...` is used in front of an array (actually, any *iterable*, which we cover in Chapter 3), it acts to "spread" it out into its individual values.

You'll typically see that usage as is shown in that previous snippet, when spreading out an array as a set of arguments to a function call. In this usage, `...` acts to give us a simpler syntactic replacement for the `apply(..)` method, which we would typically have used pre-ES6 as:

```js
foo.apply( null, [1,2,3] );		// 1 2 3
```

But `...` can be used to spread out/expand a value in other contexts as well, such as inside another array declaration:

```js
var a = [2,3,4];
var b = [ 1, ...a, 5 ];

console.log( b );					// [1,2,3,4,5]
```

In this usage, `...` is basically replacing `concat(..)`, as it behaves like `[1].concat( a, [5] )` here.

The other common usage of `...` can be seen as essentially the opposite; instead of spreading a value out, the `...` *gathers* a set of values together into an array. Consider:

```js
function foo(x, y, ...z) {
	console.log( x, y, z );
}

foo( 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 );			// 1 2 [3,4,5]
```

The `...z` in this snippet is essentially saying: "gather the *rest* of the arguments (if any) into an array called `z`." Because `x` was assigned `1`, and `y` was assigned `2`, the rest of the arguments `3`, `4`, and `5` were gathered into `z`.

Of course, if you don't have any named parameters, the `...` gathers all arguments:

```js
function foo(...args) {
	console.log( args );
}

foo( 1, 2, 3, 4, 5);			// [1,2,3,4,5]
```

**Note:** The `...args` in the `foo(..)` function declaration is usually called "rest parameters," because you're collecting the rest of the parameters. I prefer "gather," because it's more descriptive of what it does rather than what it contains.

The best part about this usage is that it provides a very solid alternative to using the long-since-deprecated `arguments` array -- actually, it's not really an array, but an array-like object. Because `args` (or whatever you call it -- a lot of people prefer `r` or `rest`) is a real array, we can get rid of lots of silly pre-ES6 tricks we jumped through to make `arguments` into something we can treat as an array.

Consider:

```js
// doing things the new ES6 way
function foo(...args) {
	// `args` is already a real array

	// discard first element in `args`
	args.shift();

	// pass along all of `args` as arguments
	// to `console.log(..)`
	console.log( ...args );
}

// doing things the old-school pre-ES6 way
function bar() {
	// turn `arguments` into a real array
	var args = Array.prototype.slice.call( arguments );

	// add some elements on the end
	args.push( 4, 5 );

	// filter out odd numbers
	args = args.filter( function(v){
		return v % 2 == 0;
	} );

	// pass along all of `args` as arguments
	// to `foo(..)`
	foo.apply( null, args );
}

bar( 0, 1, 2, 3 );					// 2 4
```

The `...args` in the `foo(..)` function declaration gathers arguments, and the `...args` in the `console.log(..)` call spreads them out. That's a good illustration of the symmetric but opposite uses of the `...` operator.

Besides the `...` usage in a function declaration, there's another case where `...` is used for gathering values, and we'll look at it in the "Too Many, Too Few, Just Enough" section later in this chapter.

## Default Parameter Values

Perhaps one of the most common idioms in JavaScript relates to setting a default value for a function parameter. The way we've done this for years should look quite familiar:

```js
function foo(x,y) {
	x = x || 11;
	y = y || 31;

	console.log( x + y );
}

foo();				// 42
foo( 5, 6 );		// 11
foo( 5 );			// 36
foo( null, 6 );		// 17
```

Of course, if you've used this pattern before, you know that it's both helpful and a little bit dangerous, if for example you need to be able to pass in what would otherwise be considered a falsy value for one of the parameters. Consider:

```js
foo( 0, 42 );		// 53 <-- Oops, not 42
```

Why? Because the `0` is falsy, and so the `x || 11` results in `11`, not the directly passed in `0`.

To fix this gotcha, some people will instead write the check more verbosely like this:

```js
function foo(x,y) {
	x = (x !== undefined) ? x : 11;
	y = (y !== undefined) ? y : 31;

	console.log( x + y );
}

foo( 0, 42 );			// 42
foo( undefined, 6 );	// 17
```

Of course, that means that any value except `undefined` can be directly passed in. However, `undefined` will be assumed to signal, "I didn't pass this in." That works great unless you actually need to be able to pass `undefined` in.

In that case, you could test to see if the argument is actually omitted, by it actually not being present in the `arguments` array, perhaps like this:

```js
function foo(x,y) {
	x = (0 in arguments) ? x : 11;
	y = (1 in arguments) ? y : 31;

	console.log( x + y );
}

foo( 5 );				// 36
foo( 5, undefined );	// NaN
```

But how would you omit the first `x` argument without the ability to pass in any kind of value (not even `undefined`) that signals "I'm omitting this argument"?

`foo(,5)` is tempting, but it's invalid syntax. `foo.apply(null,[,5])` seems like it should do the trick, but `apply(..)`'s quirks here mean that the arguments are treated as `[undefined,5]`, which of course doesn't omit.

If you investigate further, you'll find you can only omit arguments on the end (i.e., righthand side) by simply passing fewer arguments than "expected," but you cannot omit arguments in the middle or at the beginning of the arguments list. It's just not possible.

There's a principle applied to JavaScript's design here that is important to remember: `undefined` means *missing*. That is, there's no difference between `undefined` and *missing*, at least as far as function arguments go.

**Note:** There are, confusingly, other places in JS where this particular design principle doesn't apply, such as for arrays with empty slots. See the *Types & Grammar* title of this series for more information.

With all this in mind, we can now examine a nice helpful syntax added as of ES6 to streamline the assignment of default values to missing arguments:

```js
function foo(x = 11, y = 31) {
	console.log( x + y );
}

foo();					// 42
foo( 5, 6 );			// 11
foo( 0, 42 );			// 42

foo( 5 );				// 36
foo( 5, undefined );	// 36 <-- `undefined` is missing
foo( 5, null );			// 5  <-- null coerces to `0`

foo( undefined, 6 );	// 17 <-- `undefined` is missing
foo( null, 6 );			// 6  <-- null coerces to `0`
```

Notice the results and how they imply both subtle differences and similarities to the earlier approaches.

`x = 11` in a function declaration is more like `x !== undefined ? x : 11` than the much more common idiom `x || 11`, so you'll need to be careful in converting your pre-ES6 code to this ES6 default parameter value syntax.

**Note:** A rest/gather parameter (see "Spread/Rest") cannot have a default value. So, while `function foo(...vals=[1,2,3]) {` might seem an intriguing capability, it's not valid syntax. You'll need to continue to apply that sort of logic manually if necessary.

### Default Value Expressions

Function default values can be more than just simple values like `31`; they can be any valid expression, even a function call:

```js
function bar(val) {
	console.log( "bar called!" );
	return y + val;
}

function foo(x = y + 3, z = bar( x )) {
	console.log( x, z );
}

var y = 5;
foo();								// "bar called"
									// 8 13
foo( 10 );							// "bar called"
									// 10 15
y = 6;
foo( undefined, 10 );				// 9 10
```

As you can see, the default value expressions are lazily evaluated, meaning they're only run if and when they're needed -- that is, when a parameter's argument is omitted or is `undefined`.

It's a subtle detail, but the formal parameters in a function declaration are in their own scope (think of it as a scope bubble wrapped around just the `( .. )` of the function declaration), not in the function body's scope. That means a reference to an identifier in a default value expression first matches the formal parameters' scope before looking to an outer scope. See the *Scope & Closures* title of this series for more information.

Consider:

```js
var w = 1, z = 2;

function foo( x = w + 1, y = x + 1, z = z + 1 ) {
	console.log( x, y, z );
}

foo();					// ReferenceError
```

The `w` in the `w + 1` default value expression looks for `w` in the formal parameters' scope, but does not find it, so the outer scope's `w` is used. Next, The `x` in the `x + 1` default value expression finds `x` in the formal parameters' scope, and luckily `x` has already been initialized, so the assignment to `y` works fine.

However, the `z` in `z + 1` finds `z` as a not-yet-initialized-at-that-moment parameter variable, so it never tries to find the `z` from the outer scope.

As we mentioned in the "`let` Declarations" section earlier in this chapter, ES6 has a TDZ, which prevents a variable from being accessed in its uninitialized state. As such, the `z + 1` default value expression throws a TDZ `ReferenceError` error.

Though it's not necessarily a good idea for code clarity, a default value expression can even be an inline function expression call -- commonly referred to as an immediately invoked function expression (IIFE):

```js
function foo( x =
	(function(v){ return v + 11; })( 31 )
) {
	console.log( x );
}

foo();			// 42
```

There will very rarely be any cases where an IIFE (or any other executed inline function expression) will be appropriate for default value expressions. If you find yourself tempted to do this, take a step back and reevaluate!

**Warning:** If the IIFE had tried to access the `x` identifier and had not declared its own `x`, this would also have been a TDZ error, just as discussed before.

The default value expression in the previous snippet is an IIFE in that in the sense that it's a function that's executed right inline, via `(31)`. If we had left that part off, the default value assigned to `x` would have just been a function reference itself, perhaps like a default callback. There will probably be cases where that pattern will be quite useful, such as:

```js
function ajax(url, cb = function(){}) {
	// ..
}

ajax( "http://some.url.1" );
```

In this case, we essentially want to default `cb` to be a no-op empty function call if not otherwise specified. The function expression is just a function reference, not a function call itself (no invoking `()` on the end of it), which accomplishes that goal.

Since the early days of JS, there's been a little-known but useful quirk available to us: `Function.prototype` is itself an empty no-op function. So, the declaration could have been `cb = Function.prototype` and saved the inline function expression creation.

