## `for..of` Loops

Joining the `for` and `for..in` loops from the JavaScript we're all familiar with, ES6 adds a `for..of` loop, which loops over the set of values produced by an *iterator*.

The value you loop over with `for..of` must be an *iterable*, or it must be a value which can be coerced/boxed to an object (see the *Types & Grammar* title of this series) that is an iterable. An iterable is simply an object that is able to produce an iterator, which the loop then uses.

Let's compare `for..of` to `for..in` to illustrate the difference:

```js
var a = ["a","b","c","d","e"];

for (var idx in a) {
	console.log( idx );
}
// 0 1 2 3 4

for (var val of a) {
	console.log( val );
}
// "a" "b" "c" "d" "e"
```

As you can see, `for..in` loops over the keys/indexes in the `a` array, while `for..of` loops over the values in `a`.

Here's the pre-ES6 version of the `for..of` from that previous snippet:

```js
var a = ["a","b","c","d","e"],
	k = Object.keys( a );

for (var val, i = 0; i < k.length; i++) {
	val = a[ k[i] ];
	console.log( val );
}
// "a" "b" "c" "d" "e"
```

And here's the ES6 but non-`for..of` equivalent, which also gives a glimpse at manually iterating an iterator (see "Iterators" in Chapter 3):

```js
var a = ["a","b","c","d","e"];

for (var val, ret, it = a[Symbol.iterator]();
	(ret = it.next()) && !ret.done;
) {
	val = ret.value;
	console.log( val );
}
// "a" "b" "c" "d" "e"
```

Under the covers, the `for..of` loop asks the iterable for an iterator (using the built-in `Symbol.iterator`; see "Well-Known Symbols" in Chapter 7), then it repeatedly calls the iterator and assigns its produced value to the loop iteration variable.

Standard built-in values in JavaScript that are by default iterables (or provide them) include:

* Arrays
* Strings
* Generators (see Chapter 3)
* Collections / TypedArrays (see Chapter 5)

**Warning:** Plain objects are not by default suitable for `for..of` looping. That's because they don't have a default iterator, which is intentional, not a mistake. However, we won't go any further into those nuanced reasonings here. In "Iterators" in Chapter 3, we'll see how to define iterators for our own objects, which lets `for..of` loop over any object to get a set of values we define.

Here's how to loop over the characters in a primitive string:

```js
for (var c of "hello") {
	console.log( c );
}
// "h" "e" "l" "l" "o"
```

The `"hello"` primitive string value is coerced/boxed to the `String` object wrapper equivalent, which is an iterable by default.

In `for (XYZ of ABC)..`, the `XYZ` clause can either be an assignment expression or a declaration, identical to that same clause in `for` and `for..in` loops. So you can do stuff like this:

```js
var o = {};

for (o.a of [1,2,3]) {
	console.log( o.a );
}
// 1 2 3

for ({x: o.a} of [ {x: 1}, {x: 2}, {x: 3} ]) {
  console.log( o.a );
}
// 1 2 3
```

`for..of` loops can be prematurely stopped, just like other loops, with `break`, `continue`, `return` (if in a function), and thrown exceptions. In any of these cases, the iterator's `return(..)` function is automatically called (if one exists) to let the iterator perform cleanup tasks, if necessary.

**Note:** See "Iterators" in Chapter 3 for more complete coverage on iterables and iterators.

## Regular Expressions

Let's face it: regular expressions haven't changed much in JS in a long time. So it's a great thing that they've finally learned a couple of new tricks in ES6. We'll briefly cover the additions here, but the overall topic of regular expressions is so dense that you'll need to turn to chapters/books dedicated to it (of which there are many!) if you need a refresher.

### Unicode Flag

We'll cover the topic of Unicode in more detail in "Unicode" later in this chapter. Here, we'll just look briefly at the new `u` flag for ES6+ regular expressions, which turns on Unicode matching for that expression.

JavaScript strings are typically interpreted as sequences of 16-bit characters, which correspond to the characters in the *Basic Multilingual Plane (BMP)* (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plane_%28Unicode%29). But there are many UTF-16 characters that fall outside this range, and so strings may have these multibyte characters in them.

Prior to ES6, regular expressions could only match based on BMP characters, which means that those extended characters were treated as two separate characters for matching purposes. This is often not ideal.

So, as of ES6, the `u` flag tells a regular expression to process a string with the interpretation of Unicode (UTF-16) characters, such that such an extended character will be matched as a single entity.

**Warning:** Despite the name implication, "UTF-16" doesn't strictly mean 16 bits. Modern Unicode uses 21 bits, and standards like UTF-8 and UTF-16 refer roughly to how many bits are used in the representation of a character.

An example (straight from the ES6 specification): 𝄞 (the musical symbol G-clef) is Unicode point U+1D11E (0x1D11E).

If this character appears in a regular expression pattern (like `/𝄞/`), the standard BMP interpretation would be that it's two separate characters (0xD834 and 0xDD1E) to match with. But the new ES6 Unicode-aware mode means that `/𝄞/u` (or the escaped Unicode form `/\u{1D11E}/u`) will match `"𝄞"` in a string as a single matched character.

You might be wondering why this matters? In non-Unicode BMP mode, the pattern is treated as two separate characters, but would still find the match in a string with the `"𝄞"` character in it, as you can see if you try:

```js
/𝄞/.test( "𝄞-clef" );			// true
```

The length of the match is what matters. For example:

```js
/^.-clef/ .test( "𝄞-clef" );		// false
/^.-clef/u.test( "𝄞-clef" );		// true
```

The `^.-clef` in the pattern says to match only a single character at the beginning before the normal `"-clef"` text. In standard BMP mode, the match fails (two characters), but with `u` Unicode mode flagged on, the match succeeds (one character).

It's also important to note that `u` makes quantifiers like `+` and `*` apply to the entire Unicode code point as a single character, not just the *lower surrogate* (aka rightmost half of the symbol) of the character. The same goes for Unicode characters appearing in character classes, like `/[💩-💫]/u`.

**Note:** There's plenty more nitty-gritty details about `u` behavior in regular expressions, which Mathias Bynens (https://twitter.com/mathias) has written extensively about (https://mathiasbynens.be/notes/es6-unicode-regex).

### Sticky Flag

Another flag mode added to ES6 regular expressions is `y`, which is often called "sticky mode." *Sticky* essentially means the regular expression has a virtual anchor at its beginning that keeps it rooted to matching at only the position indicated by the regular expression's `lastIndex` property.

To illustrate, let's consider two regular expressions, the first without sticky mode and the second with:

```js
var re1 = /foo/,
	str = "++foo++";

re1.lastIndex;			// 0
re1.test( str );		// true
re1.lastIndex;			// 0 -- not updated

re1.lastIndex = 4;
re1.test( str );		// true -- ignored `lastIndex`
re1.lastIndex;			// 4 -- not updated
```

Three things to observe about this snippet:

* `test(..)` doesn't pay any attention to `lastIndex`'s value, and always just performs its match from the beginning of the input string.
* Because our pattern does not have a `^` start-of-input anchor, the search for `"foo"` is free to move ahead through the whole string looking for a match.
* `lastIndex` is not updated by `test(..)`.

Now, let's try a sticky mode regular expression:

```js
var re2 = /foo/y,		// <-- notice the `y` sticky flag
	str = "++foo++";

re2.lastIndex;			// 0
re2.test( str );		// false -- "foo" not found at `0`
re2.lastIndex;			// 0

re2.lastIndex = 2;
re2.test( str );		// true
re2.lastIndex;			// 5 -- updated to after previous match

re2.test( str );		// false
re2.lastIndex;			// 0 -- reset after previous match failure
```

And so our new observations about sticky mode:

* `test(..)` uses `lastIndex` as the exact and only position in `str` to look to make a match. There is no moving ahead to look for the match -- it's either there at the `lastIndex` position or not.
* If a match is made, `test(..)` updates `lastIndex` to point to the character immediately following the match. If a match fails, `test(..)` resets `lastIndex` back to `0`.

Normal non-sticky patterns that aren't otherwise `^`-rooted to the start-of-input are free to move ahead in the input string looking for a match. But sticky mode restricts the pattern to matching just at the position of `lastIndex`.

As I suggested at the beginning of this section, another way of looking at this is that `y` implies a virtual anchor at the beginning of the pattern that is relative (aka constrains the start of the match) to exactly the `lastIndex` position.

**Warning:** In previous literature on the topic, it has alternatively been asserted that this behavior is like `y` implying a `^` (start-of-input) anchor in the pattern. This is inaccurate. We'll explain in further detail in "Anchored Sticky" later.

#### Sticky Positioning

It may seem strangely limiting that to use `y` for repeated matches, you have to manually ensure `lastIndex` is in the exact right position, as it has no move-ahead capability for matching.

Here's one possible scenario: if you know that the match you care about is always going to be at a position that's a multiple of a number (e.g., `0`, `10`, `20`, etc.), you can just construct a limited pattern matching what you care about, but then manually set `lastIndex` each time before match to those fixed positions.

Consider:

```js
var re = /f../y,
	str = "foo       far       fad";

str.match( re );		// ["foo"]

re.lastIndex = 10;
str.match( re );		// ["far"]

re.lastIndex = 20;
str.match( re );		// ["fad"]
```

However, if you're parsing a string that isn't formatted in fixed positions like that, figuring out what to set `lastIndex` to before each match is likely going to be untenable.

There's a saving nuance to consider here. `y` requires that `lastIndex` be in the exact position for a match to occur. But it doesn't strictly require that *you* manually set `lastIndex`.

Instead, you can construct your expressions in such a way that they capture in each main match everything before and after the thing you care about, up to right before the next thing you'll care to match.

Because `lastIndex` will set to the next character beyond the end of a match, if you've matched everything up to that point, `lastIndex` will always be in the correct position for the `y` pattern to start from the next time.

**Warning:** If you can't predict the structure of the input string in a sufficiently patterned way like that, this technique may not be suitable and you may not be able to use `y`.

Having structured string input is likely the most practical scenario where `y` will be capable of performing repeated matching throughout a string. Consider:

```js
var re = /\d+\.\s(.*?)(?:\s|$)/y
	str = "1. foo 2. bar 3. baz";

str.match( re );		// [ "1. foo ", "foo" ]

re.lastIndex;			// 7 -- correct position!
str.match( re );		// [ "2. bar ", "bar" ]

re.lastIndex;			// 14 -- correct position!
str.match( re );		// ["3. baz", "baz"]
```

This works because I knew something ahead of time about the structure of the input string: there is always a numeral prefix like `"1. "` before the desired match (`"foo"`, etc.), and either a space after it, or the end of the string (`$` anchor). So the regular expression I constructed captures all of that in each main match, and then I use a matching group `( )` so that the stuff I really care about is separated out for convenience.

After the first match (`"1. foo "`), the `lastIndex` is `7`, which is already the position needed to start the next match, for `"2. bar "`, and so on.

If you're going to use `y` sticky mode for repeated matches, you'll probably want to look for opportunities to have `lastIndex` automatically positioned as we've just demonstrated.

#### Sticky Versus Global

Some readers may be aware that you can emulate something like this `lastIndex`-relative matching with the `g` global match flag and the `exec(..)` method, as so:

```js
var re = /o+./g,		// <-- look, `g`!
	str = "foot book more";

re.exec( str );			// ["oot"]
re.lastIndex;			// 4

re.exec( str );			// ["ook"]
re.lastIndex;			// 9

re.exec( str );			// ["or"]
re.lastIndex;			// 13

re.exec( str );			// null -- no more matches!
re.lastIndex;			// 0 -- starts over now!
```

While it's true that `g` pattern matches with `exec(..)` start their matching from `lastIndex`'s current value, and also update `lastIndex` after each match (or failure), this is not the same thing as `y`'s behavior.

Notice in the previous snippet that `"ook"`, located at position `6`, was matched and found by the second `exec(..)` call, even though at the time, `lastIndex` was `4` (from the end of the previous match). Why? Because as we said earlier, non-sticky matches are free to move ahead in their matching. A sticky mode expression would have failed here, because it would not be allowed to move ahead.

In addition to perhaps undesired move-ahead matching behavior, another downside to just using `g` instead of `y` is that `g` changes the behavior of some matching methods, like `str.match(re)`.

Consider:

```js
var re = /o+./g,		// <-- look, `g`!
	str = "foot book more";

str.match( re );		// ["oot","ook","or"]
```

See how all the matches were returned at once? Sometimes that's OK, but sometimes that's not what you want.

The `y` sticky flag will give you one-at-a-time progressive matching with utilities like `test(..)` and `match(..)`. Just make sure the `lastIndex` is always in the right position for each match!

#### Anchored Sticky

As we warned earlier, it's inaccurate to think of sticky mode as implying a pattern starts with `^`. The `^` anchor has a distinct meaning in regular expressions, which is *not altered* by sticky mode. `^` is an anchor that *always* refers to the beginning of the input, and *is not* in any way relative to `lastIndex`.

Besides poor/inaccurate documentation on this topic, the confusion is unfortunately strengthened further because an older pre-ES6 experiment with sticky mode in Firefox *did* make `^` relative to `lastIndex`, so that behavior has been around for years.

ES6 elected not to do it that way. `^` in a pattern means start-of-input absolutely and only.

As a consequence, a pattern like `/^foo/y` will always and only find a `"foo"` match at the beginning of a string, *if it's allowed to match there*. If `lastIndex` is not `0`, the match will fail. Consider:

```js
var re = /^foo/y,
	str = "foo";

re.test( str );			// true
re.test( str );			// false
re.lastIndex;			// 0 -- reset after failure

re.lastIndex = 1;
re.test( str );			// false -- failed for positioning
re.lastIndex;			// 0 -- reset after failure
```

Bottom line: `y` plus `^` plus `lastIndex > 0` is an incompatible combination that will always cause a failed match.

**Note:** While `y` does not alter the meaning of `^` in any way, the `m` multiline mode *does*, such that `^` means start-of-input *or* start of text after a newline. So, if you combine `y` and `m` flags together for a pattern, you can find multiple `^`-rooted matches in a string. But remember: because it's `y` sticky, you'll have to make sure `lastIndex` is pointing at the correct new line position (likely by matching to the end of the line) each subsequent time, or no subsequent matches will be made.

### Regular Expression `flags`

Prior to ES6, if you wanted to examine a regular expression object to see what flags it had applied, you needed to parse them out -- ironically, probably with another regular expression -- from the content of the `source` property, such as:

```js
var re = /foo/ig;

re.toString();			// "/foo/ig"

var flags = re.toString().match( /\/([gim]*)$/ )[1];

flags;					// "ig"
```

As of ES6, you can now get these values directly, with the new `flags` property:

```js
var re = /foo/ig;

re.flags;				// "gi"
```

It's a small nuance, but the ES6 specification calls for the expression's flags to be listed in this order: `"gimuy"`, regardless of what order the original pattern was specified with. That's the reason for the difference between `/ig` and `"gi"`.

No, the order of flags specified or listed doesn't matter.

Another tweak from ES6 is that the `RegExp(..)` constructor is now `flags`-aware if you pass it an existing regular expression:

```js
var re1 = /foo*/y;
re1.source;							// "foo*"
re1.flags;							// "y"

var re2 = new RegExp( re1 );
re2.source;							// "foo*"
re2.flags;							// "y"

var re3 = new RegExp( re1, "ig" );
re3.source;							// "foo*"
re3.flags;							// "gi"
```

Prior to ES6, the `re3` construction would throw an error, but as of ES6 you can override the flags when duplicating.

## Number Literal Extensions

Prior to ES5, number literals looked like the following -- the octal form was not officially specified, only allowed as an extension that browsers had come to de facto agreement on:

```js
var dec = 42,
	oct = 052,
	hex = 0x2a;
```

**Note:** Though you are specifying a number in different bases, the number's mathematic value is what is stored, and the default output interpretation is always base-10. The three variables in the previous snippet all have the `42` value stored in them.

To further illustrate that `052` was a nonstandard form extension, consider:

```js
Number( "42" );				// 42
Number( "052" );			// 52
Number( "0x2a" );			// 42
```

ES5 continued to permit the browser-extended octal form (including such inconsistencies), except that in strict mode, the octal literal (`052`) form is disallowed. This restriction was done mainly because many developers had the habit (from other languages) of seemingly innocuously prefixing otherwise base-10 numbers with `0`'s for code alignment purposes, and then running into the accidental fact that they'd changed the number value entirely!

ES6 continues the legacy of changes/variations to how number literals outside base-10 numbers can be represented. There's now an official octal form, an amended hexadecimal form, and a brand-new binary form. For web compatibility reasons, the old octal `052` form will continue to be legal (though unspecified) in non-strict mode, but should really never be used anymore.

Here are the new ES6 number literal forms:

```js
var dec = 42,
	oct = 0o52,			// or `0O52` :(
	hex = 0x2a,			// or `0X2a` :/
	bin = 0b101010;		// or `0B101010` :/
```

The only decimal form allowed is base-10. Octal, hexadecimal, and binary are all integer forms.

And the string representations of these forms are all able to be coerced/converted to their number equivalent:

```js
Number( "42" );			// 42
Number( "0o52" );		// 42
Number( "0x2a" );		// 42
Number( "0b101010" );	// 42
```

Though not strictly new to ES6, it's a little-known fact that you can actually go the opposite direction of conversion (well, sort of):

```js
var a = 42;

a.toString();			// "42" -- also `a.toString( 10 )`
a.toString( 8 );		// "52"
a.toString( 16 );		// "2a"
a.toString( 2 );		// "101010"
```

In fact, you can represent a number this way in any base from `2` to `36`, though it'd be rare that you'd go outside the standard bases: 2, 8, 10, and 16.

## Unicode

Let me just say that this section is not an exhaustive everything-you-ever-wanted-to-know-about-Unicode resource. I want to cover what you need to know that's *changing* for Unicode in ES6, but we won't go much deeper than that. Mathias Bynens (http://twitter.com/mathias) has written/spoken extensively and brilliantly about JS and Unicode (see https://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-unicode and http://fluentconf.com/javascript-html-2015/public/content/2015/02/18-javascript-loves-unicode).

The Unicode characters that range from `0x0000` to `0xFFFF` contain all the standard printed characters (in various languages) that you're likely to have seen or interacted with. This group of characters is called the *Basic Multilingual Plane (BMP)*. The BMP even contains fun symbols like this cool snowman: ☃ (U+2603).

There are lots of other extended Unicode characters beyond this BMP set, which range up to `0x10FFFF`. These symbols are often referred to as *astral* symbols, as that's the name given to the set of 16 *planes* (e.g., layers/groupings) of characters beyond the BMP. Examples of astral symbols include 𝄞 (U+1D11E) and 💩 (U+1F4A9).

Prior to ES6, JavaScript strings could specify Unicode characters using Unicode escaping, such as:

```js
var snowman = "\u2603";
console.log( snowman );			// "☃"
```

However, the `\uXXXX` Unicode escaping only supports four hexadecimal characters, so you can only represent the BMP set of characters in this way. To represent an astral character using Unicode escaping prior to ES6, you need to use a *surrogate pair* -- basically two specially calculated Unicode-escaped characters side by side, which JS interprets together as a single astral character:

```js
var gclef = "\uD834\uDD1E";
console.log( gclef );			// "𝄞"
```

As of ES6, we now have a new form for Unicode escaping (in strings and regular expressions), called Unicode *code point escaping*:

```js
var gclef = "\u{1D11E}";
console.log( gclef );			// "𝄞"
```

As you can see, the difference is the presence of the `{ }` in the escape sequence, which allows it to contain any number of hexadecimal characters. Because you only need six to represent the highest possible code point value in Unicode (i.e., 0x10FFFF), this is sufficient.

### Unicode-Aware String Operations

By default, JavaScript string operations and methods are not sensitive to astral symbols in string values. So, they treat each BMP character individually, even the two surrogate halves that make up an otherwise single astral character. Consider:

```js
var snowman = "☃";
snowman.length;					// 1

var gclef = "𝄞";
gclef.length;					// 2
```

So, how do we accurately calculate the length of such a string? In this scenario, the following trick will work:

```js
var gclef = "𝄞";

[...gclef].length;				// 1
Array.from( gclef ).length;		// 1
```

Recall from the "`for..of` Loops" section earlier in this chapter that ES6 strings have built-in iterators. This iterator happens to be Unicode-aware, meaning it will automatically output an astral symbol as a single value. We take advantage of that using the `...` spread operator in an array literal, which creates an array of the string's symbols. Then we just inspect the length of that resultant array. ES6's `Array.from(..)` does basically the same thing as `[...XYZ]`, but we'll cover that utility in detail in Chapter 6.

**Warning:** It should be noted that constructing and exhausting an iterator just to get the length of a string is quite expensive on performance, relatively speaking, compared to what a theoretically optimized native utility/property would do.

Unfortunately, the full answer is not as simple or straightforward. In addition to the surrogate pairs (which the string iterator takes care of), there are special Unicode code points that behave in other special ways, which is much harder to account for. For example, there's a set of code points that modify the previous adjacent character, known as *Combining Diacritical Marks*.

Consider these two string outputs:

```js
console.log( s1 );				// "é"
console.log( s2 );				// "é"
```

They look the same, but they're not! Here's how we created `s1` and `s2`:

```js
var s1 = "\xE9",
	s2 = "e\u0301";
```

As you can probably guess, our previous `length` trick doesn't work with `s2`:

```js
[...s1].length;					// 1
[...s2].length;					// 2
```

So what can we do? In this case, we can perform a *Unicode normalization* on the value before inquiring about its length, using the ES6 `String#normalize(..)` utility (which we'll cover more in Chapter 6):

```js
var s1 = "\xE9",
	s2 = "e\u0301";

s1.normalize().length;			// 1
s2.normalize().length;			// 1

s1 === s2;						// false
s1 === s2.normalize();			// true
```

Essentially, `normalize(..)` takes a sequence like `"e\u0301"` and normalizes it to `"\xE9"`. Normalization can even combine multiple adjacent combining marks if there's a suitable Unicode character they combine to:

```js
var s1 = "o\u0302\u0300",
	s2 = s1.normalize(),
	s3 = "ồ";

s1.length;						// 3
s2.length;						// 1
s3.length;						// 1

s2 === s3;						// true
```

Unfortunately, normalization isn't fully perfect here, either. If you have multiple combining marks modifying a single character, you may not get the length count you'd expect, because there may not be a single defined normalized character that represents the combination of all the marks. For example:

```js
var s1 = "e\u0301\u0330";

console.log( s1 );				// "ḛ́"

s1.normalize().length;			// 2
```

The further you go down this rabbit hole, the more you realize that it's difficult to get one precise definition for "length." What we see visually rendered as a single character -- more precisely called a *grapheme* -- doesn't always strictly relate to a single "character" in the program processing sense.

**Tip:** If you want to see just how deep this rabbit hole goes, check out the "Grapheme Cluster Boundaries" algorithm (http://www.Unicode.org/reports/tr29/#Grapheme_Cluster_Boundaries).

### Character Positioning

Similar to length complications, what does it actually mean to ask, "what is the character at position 2?" The naive pre-ES6 answer comes from `charAt(..)`, which will not respect the atomicity of an astral character, nor will it take into account combining marks.

Consider:

```js
var s1 = "abc\u0301d",
	s2 = "ab\u0107d",
	s3 = "ab\u{1d49e}d";

console.log( s1 );				// "abćd"
console.log( s2 );				// "abćd"
console.log( s3 );				// "ab𝒞d"

s1.charAt( 2 );					// "c"
s2.charAt( 2 );					// "ć"
s3.charAt( 2 );					// "" <-- unprintable surrogate
s3.charAt( 3 );					// "" <-- unprintable surrogate
```

So, is ES6 giving us a Unicode-aware version of `charAt(..)`? Unfortunately, no. At the time of this writing, there's a proposal for such a utility that's under consideration for post-ES6.

But with what we explored in the previous section (and of course with the limitations noted thereof!), we can hack an ES6 answer:

```js
var s1 = "abc\u0301d",
	s2 = "ab\u0107d",
	s3 = "ab\u{1d49e}d";

[...s1.normalize()][2];			// "ć"
[...s2.normalize()][2];			// "ć"
[...s3.normalize()][2];			// "𝒞"
```

**Warning:** Reminder of an earlier warning: constructing and exhausting an iterator each time you want to get at a single character is... not very ideal, performance wise. Let's hope we get a built-in and optimized utility for this soon, post-ES6.

What about a Unicode-aware version of the `charCodeAt(..)` utility? ES6 gives us `codePointAt(..)`:

```js
var s1 = "abc\u0301d",
	s2 = "ab\u0107d",
	s3 = "ab\u{1d49e}d";

s1.normalize().codePointAt( 2 ).toString( 16 );
// "107"

s2.normalize().codePointAt( 2 ).toString( 16 );
// "107"

s3.normalize().codePointAt( 2 ).toString( 16 );
// "1d49e"
```

What about the other direction? A Unicode-aware version of `String.fromCharCode(..)` is ES6's `String.fromCodePoint(..)`:

```js
String.fromCodePoint( 0x107 );		// "ć"

String.fromCodePoint( 0x1d49e );	// "𝒞"
```

So wait, can we just combine `String.fromCodePoint(..)` and `codePointAt(..)` to get a better version of a Unicode-aware `charAt(..)` from earlier? Yep!

```js
var s1 = "abc\u0301d",
	s2 = "ab\u0107d",
	s3 = "ab\u{1d49e}d";

String.fromCodePoint( s1.normalize().codePointAt( 2 ) );
// "ć"

String.fromCodePoint( s2.normalize().codePointAt( 2 ) );
// "ć"

String.fromCodePoint( s3.normalize().codePointAt( 2 ) );
// "𝒞"
```

There's quite a few other string methods we haven't addressed here, including `toUpperCase()`, `toLowerCase()`, `substring(..)`, `indexOf(..)`, `slice(..)`, and a dozen others. None of these have been changed or augmented for full Unicode awareness, so you should be very careful -- probably just avoid them! -- when working with strings containing astral symbols.

There are also several string methods that use regular expressions for their behavior, like `replace(..)` and `match(..)`. Thankfully, ES6 brings Unicode awareness to regular expressions, as we covered in "Unicode Flag" earlier in this chapter.

OK, there we have it! JavaScript's Unicode string support is significantly better over pre-ES6 (though still not perfect) with the various additions we've just covered.

### Unicode Identifier Names

Unicode can also be used in identifier names (variables, properties, etc.). Prior to ES6, you could do this with Unicode-escapes, like:

```js
var \u03A9 = 42;

// same as: var Ω = 42;
```

As of ES6, you can also use the earlier explained code point escape syntax:

```js
var \u{2B400} = 42;

// same as: var 𫐀 = 42;
```

There's a complex set of rules around exactly which Unicode characters are allowed. Furthermore, some are allowed only if they're not the first character of the identifier name.

**Note:** Mathias Bynens has a great post (https://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-identifiers-es6) on all the nitty-gritty details.

The reasons for using such unusual characters in identifier names are rather rare and academic. You typically won't be best served by writing code that relies on these esoteric capabilities.

## Symbols

With ES6, for the first time in quite a while, a new primitive type has been added to JavaScript: the `symbol`. Unlike the other primitive types, however, symbols don't have a literal form.

Here's how you create a symbol:

```js
var sym = Symbol( "some optional description" );

typeof sym;		// "symbol"
```

Some things to note:

* You cannot and should not use `new` with `Symbol(..)`. It's not a constructor, nor are you producing an object.
* The parameter passed to `Symbol(..)` is optional. If passed, it should be a string that gives a friendly description for the symbol's purpose.
* The `typeof` output is a new value (`"symbol"`) that is the primary way to identify a symbol.

The description, if provided, is solely used for the stringification representation of the symbol:

```js
sym.toString();		// "Symbol(some optional description)"
```

Similar to how primitive string values are not instances of `String`, symbols are also not instances of `Symbol`. If, for some reason, you want to construct a boxed wrapper object form of a symbol value, you can do the following:

```js
sym instanceof Symbol;		// false

var symObj = Object( sym );
symObj instanceof Symbol;	// true

symObj.valueOf() === sym;	// true
```

**Note:** `symObj` in this snippet is interchangeable with `sym`; either form can be used in all places symbols are utilized. There's not much reason to use the boxed wrapper object form (`symObj`) instead of the primitive form (`sym`). Keeping with similar advice for other primitives, it's probably best to prefer `sym` over `symObj`.

The internal value of a symbol itself -- referred to as its `name` -- is hidden from the code and cannot be obtained. You can think of this symbol value as an automatically generated, unique (within your application) string value.

But if the value is hidden and unobtainable, what's the point of having a symbol at all?

The main point of a symbol is to create a string-like value that can't collide with any other value. So, for example, consider using a symbol as a constant representing an event name:

```js
const EVT_LOGIN = Symbol( "event.login" );
```

You'd then use `EVT_LOGIN` in place of a generic string literal like `"event.login"`:

```js
evthub.listen( EVT_LOGIN, function(data){
	// ..
} );
```

The benefit here is that `EVT_LOGIN` holds a value that cannot be duplicated (accidentally or otherwise) by any other value, so it is impossible for there to be any confusion of which event is being dispatched or handled.

**Note:** Under the covers, the `evthub` utility assumed in the previous snippet would almost certainly be using the symbol value from the `EVT_LOGIN` argument directly as the property/key in some internal object (hash) that tracks event handlers. If `evthub` instead needed to use the symbol value as a real string, it would need to explicitly coerce with `String(..)` or `toString()`, as implicit string coercion of symbols is not allowed.

You may use a symbol directly as a property name/key in an object, such as a special property that you want to treat as hidden or meta in usage. It's important to know that although you intend to treat it as such, it is not *actually* a hidden or untouchable property.

Consider this module that implements the *singleton* pattern behavior -- that is, it only allows itself to be created once:

```js
const INSTANCE = Symbol( "instance" );

function HappyFace() {
	if (HappyFace[INSTANCE]) return HappyFace[INSTANCE];

	function smile() { .. }

	return HappyFace[INSTANCE] = {
		smile: smile
	};
}

var me = HappyFace(),
	you = HappyFace();

me === you;			// true
```

The `INSTANCE` symbol value here is a special, almost hidden, meta-like property stored statically on the `HappyFace()` function object.

It could alternatively have been a plain old property like `__instance`, and the behavior would have been identical. The usage of a symbol simply improves the metaprogramming style, keeping this `INSTANCE` property set apart from any other normal properties.

### Symbol Registry

One mild downside to using symbols as in the last few examples is that the `EVT_LOGIN` and `INSTANCE` variables had to be stored in an outer scope (perhaps even the global scope), or otherwise somehow stored in a publicly available location, so that all parts of the code that need to use the symbols can access them.

To aid in organizing code with access to these symbols, you can create symbol values with the *global symbol registry*. For example:

```js
const EVT_LOGIN = Symbol.for( "event.login" );

console.log( EVT_LOGIN );		// Symbol(event.login)
```

And:

```js
function HappyFace() {
	const INSTANCE = Symbol.for( "instance" );

	if (HappyFace[INSTANCE]) return HappyFace[INSTANCE];

	// ..

	return HappyFace[INSTANCE] = { .. };
}
```

`Symbol.for(..)` looks in the global symbol registry to see if a symbol is already stored with the provided description text, and returns it if so. If not, it creates one to return. In other words, the global symbol registry treats symbol values, by description text, as singletons themselves.

But that also means that any part of your application can retrieve the symbol from the registry using `Symbol.for(..)`, as long as the matching description name is used.

Ironically, symbols are basically intended to replace the use of *magic strings* (arbitrary string values given special meaning) in your application. But you precisely use *magic* description string values to uniquely identify/locate them in the global symbol registry!

To avoid accidental collisions, you'll probably want to make your symbol descriptions quite unique. One easy way of doing that is to include prefix/context/namespacing information in them.

For example, consider a utility such as the following:

```js
function extractValues(str) {
	var key = Symbol.for( "extractValues.parse" ),
		re = extractValues[key] ||
			/[^=&]+?=([^&]+?)(?=&|$)/g,
		values = [], match;

	while (match = re.exec( str )) {
		values.push( match[1] );
	}

	return values;
}
```

We use the magic string value `"extractValues.parse"` because it's quite unlikely that any other symbol in the registry would ever collide with that description.

If a user of this utility wants to override the parsing regular expression, they can also use the symbol registry:

```js
extractValues[Symbol.for( "extractValues.parse" )] =
	/..some pattern../g;

extractValues( "..some string.." );
```

Aside from the assistance the symbol registry provides in globally storing these values, everything we're seeing here could have been done by just actually using the magic string `"extractValues.parse"` as the key, rather than the symbol. The improvements exist at the metaprogramming level more than the functional level.

You may have occasion to use a symbol value that has been stored in the registry to look up what description text (key) it's stored under. For example, you may need to signal to another part of your application how to locate a symbol in the registry because you cannot pass the symbol value itself.

You can retrieve a registered symbol's description text (key) using `Symbol.keyFor(..)`:

```js
var s = Symbol.for( "something cool" );

var desc = Symbol.keyFor( s );
console.log( desc );			// "something cool"

// get the symbol from the registry again
var s2 = Symbol.for( desc );

s2 === s;						// true
```

### Symbols as Object Properties

If a symbol is used as a property/key of an object, it's stored in a special way so that the property will not show up in a normal enumeration of the object's properties:

```js
var o = {
	foo: 42,
	[ Symbol( "bar" ) ]: "hello world",
	baz: true
};

Object.getOwnPropertyNames( o );	// [ "foo","baz" ]
```

To retrieve an object's symbol properties:

```js
Object.getOwnPropertySymbols( o );	// [ Symbol(bar) ]
```

This makes it clear that a property symbol is not actually hidden or inaccessible, as you can always see it in the `Object.getOwnPropertySymbols(..)` list.

#### Built-In Symbols

ES6 comes with a number of predefined built-in symbols that expose various meta behaviors on JavaScript object values. However, these symbols are *not* registered in the global symbol registry, as one might expect.

Instead, they're stored as properties on the `Symbol` function object. For example, in the "`for..of`" section earlier in this chapter, we introduced the `Symbol.iterator` value:

```js
var a = [1,2,3];

a[Symbol.iterator];			// native function
```

The specification uses the `@@` prefix notation to refer to the built-in symbols, the most common ones being: `@@iterator`, `@@toStringTag`, `@@toPrimitive`. Several others are defined as well, though they probably won't be used as often.

**Note:** See "Well Known Symbols" in Chapter 7 for detailed information about how these built-in symbols are used for meta programming purposes.

