## Classes

From nearly the beginning of JavaScript, syntax and development patterns have all strived (read: struggled) to put on a facade of supporting class-oriented development. With things like `new` and `instanceof` and a `.constructor` property, who couldn't help but be teased that JS had classes hidden somewhere inside its prototype system?

Of course, JS "classes" aren't nearly the same as classical classes. The differences are well documented, so I won't belabor that point any further here.

**Note:** To learn more about the patterns used in JS to fake "classes," and an alternative view of prototypes called "delegation," see the second half of the *this & Object Prototypes* title of this series.

### `class`

Although JS's prototype mechanism doesn't work like traditional classes, that doesn't stop the strong tide of demand on the language to extend the syntactic sugar so that expressing "classes" looks more like real classes. Enter the ES6 `class` keyword and its associated mechanism.

This feature is the result of a highly contentious and drawn-out debate, and represents a smaller subset compromise from several strongly opposed views on how to approach JS classes. Most developers who want full classes in JS will find parts of the new syntax quite inviting, but will find important bits still missing. Don't worry, though. TC39 is already working on additional features to augment classes in the post-ES6 timeframe.

At the heart of the new ES6 class mechanism is the `class` keyword, which identifies a *block* where the contents define the members of a function's prototype. Consider:

```js
class Foo {
	constructor(a,b) {
		this.x = a;
		this.y = b;
	}

	gimmeXY() {
		return this.x * this.y;
	}
}
```

Some things to note:

* `class Foo` implies creating a (special) function of the name `Foo`, much like you did pre-ES6.
* `constructor(..)` identifies the signature of that `Foo(..)` function, as well as its body contents.
* Class methods use the same "concise method" syntax available to object literals, as discussed in Chapter 2. This also includes the concise generator form as discussed earlier in this chapter, as well as the ES5 getter/setter syntax. However, class methods are non-enumerable whereas object methods are by default enumerable.
* Unlike object literals, there are no commas separating members in a `class` body! In fact, they're not even allowed.

The `class` syntax definition in the previous snippet can be roughly thought of as this pre-ES6 equivalent, which probably will look fairly familiar to those who've done prototype-style coding before:

```js
function Foo(a,b) {
	this.x = a;
	this.y = b;
}

Foo.prototype.gimmeXY = function() {
	return this.x * this.y;
}
```

In either the pre-ES6 form or the new ES6 `class` form, this "class" can now be instantiated and used just as you'd expect:

```js
var f = new Foo( 5, 15 );

f.x;						// 5
f.y;						// 15
f.gimmeXY();				// 75
```

Caution! Though `class Foo` seems much like `function Foo()`, there are important differences:

* A `Foo(..)` call of `class Foo` *must* be made with `new`, as the pre-ES6 option of `Foo.call( obj )` will *not* work.
* While `function Foo` is "hoisted" (see the *Scope & Closures* title of this series), `class Foo` is not; the `extends ..` clause specifies an expression that cannot be "hoisted." So, you must declare a `class` before you can instantiate it.
* `class Foo` in the top global scope creates a lexical `Foo` identifier in that scope, but unlike `function Foo` does not create a global object property of that name.

The established `instanceof` operator still works with ES6 classes, because `class` just creates a constructor function of the same name. However, ES6 introduces a way to customize how `instanceof` works, using `Symbol.hasInstance` (see "Well-Known Symbols" in Chapter 7).

Another way of thinking about `class`, which I find more convenient, is as a *macro* that is used to automatically populate a `prototype` object. Optionally, it also wires up the `[[Prototype]]` relationship if using `extends` (see the next section).

An ES6 `class` isn't really an entity itself, but a meta concept that wraps around other concrete entities, such as functions and properties, and ties them together.

**Tip:** In addition to the declaration form, a `class` can also be an expression, as in: `var x = class Y { .. }`. This is primarily useful for passing a class definition (technically, the constructor itself) as a function argument or assigning it to an object property.

### `extends` and `super`

ES6 classes also have syntactic sugar for establishing the `[[Prototype]]` delegation link between two function prototypes -- commonly mislabeled "inheritance" or confusingly labeled "prototype inheritance" -- using the class-oriented familiar terminology `extends`:

```js
class Bar extends Foo {
	constructor(a,b,c) {
		super( a, b );
		this.z = c;
	}

	gimmeXYZ() {
		return super.gimmeXY() * this.z;
	}
}

var b = new Bar( 5, 15, 25 );

b.x;						// 5
b.y;						// 15
b.z;						// 25
b.gimmeXYZ();				// 1875
```

A significant new addition is `super`, which is actually something not directly possible pre-ES6 (without some unfortunate hack trade-offs). In the constructor, `super` automatically refers to the "parent constructor," which in the previous example is `Foo(..)`. In a method, it refers to the "parent object," such that you can then make a property/method access off it, such as `super.gimmeXY()`.

`Bar extends Foo` of course means to link the `[[Prototype]]` of `Bar.prototype` to `Foo.prototype`. So, `super` in a method like `gimmeXYZ()` specifically means `Foo.prototype`, whereas `super` means `Foo` when used in the `Bar` constructor.

**Note:** `super` is not limited to `class` declarations. It also works in object literals, in much the same way we're discussing here. See "Object `super`" in Chapter 2 for more information.

#### There Be `super` Dragons

It is not insignificant to note that `super` behaves differently depending on where it appears. In fairness, most of the time, that won't be a problem. But surprises await if you deviate from a narrow norm.

There may be cases where in the constructor you would want to reference the `Foo.prototype`, such as to directly access one of its properties/methods. However, `super` in the constructor cannot be used in that way; `super.prototype` will not work. `super(..)` means roughly to call `new Foo(..)`, but isn't actually a usable reference to `Foo` itself.

Symmetrically, you may want to reference the `Foo(..)` function from inside a non-constructor method. `super.constructor` will point at `Foo(..)` the function, but beware that this function can *only* be invoked with `new`. `new super.constructor(..)` would be valid, but it wouldn't be terribly useful in most cases, because you can't make that call use or reference the current `this` object context, which is likely what you'd want.

Also, `super` looks like it might be driven by a function's context just like `this` -- that is, that they'd both be dynamically bound. However, `super` is not dynamic like `this` is. When a constructor or method makes a `super` reference inside it at declaration time (in the `class` body), that `super` is statically bound to that specific class hierarchy, and cannot be overridden (at least in ES6).

What does that mean? It means that if you're in the habit of taking a method from one "class" and "borrowing" it for another class by overriding its `this`, say with `call(..)` or `apply(..)`, that may very well create surprises if the method you're borrowing has a `super` in it. Consider this class hierarchy:

```js
class ParentA {
	constructor() { this.id = "a"; }
	foo() { console.log( "ParentA:", this.id ); }
}

class ParentB {
	constructor() { this.id = "b"; }
	foo() { console.log( "ParentB:", this.id ); }
}

class ChildA extends ParentA {
	foo() {
		super.foo();
		console.log( "ChildA:", this.id );
	}
}

class ChildB extends ParentB {
	foo() {
		super.foo();
		console.log( "ChildB:", this.id );
	}
}

var a = new ChildA();
a.foo();					// ParentA: a
							// ChildA: a
var b = new ChildB();		// ParentB: b
b.foo();					// ChildB: b
```

All seems fairly natural and expected in this previous snippet. However, if you try to borrow `b.foo()` and use it in the context of `a` -- by virtue of dynamic `this` binding, such borrowing is quite common and used in many different ways, including mixins most notably -- you may find this result an ugly surprise:

```js
// borrow `b.foo()` to use in `a` context
b.foo.call( a );			// ParentB: a
							// ChildB: a
```

As you can see, the `this.id` reference was dynamically rebound so that `: a` is reported in both cases instead of `: b`. But `b.foo()`'s `super.foo()` reference wasn't dynamically rebound, so it still reported `ParentB` instead of the expected `ParentA`.

Because `b.foo()` references `super`, it is statically bound to the `ChildB`/`ParentB` hierarchy and cannot be used against the `ChildA`/`ParentA` hierarchy. There is no ES6 solution to this limitation.

`super` seems to work intuitively if you have a static class hierarchy with no cross-pollination. But in all fairness, one of the main benefits of doing `this`-aware coding is exactly that sort of flexibility. Simply, `class` + `super` requires you to avoid such techniques.

The choice boils down to narrowing your object design to these static hierarchies -- `class`, `extends`, and `super` will be quite nice -- or dropping all attempts to "fake" classes and instead embrace dynamic and flexible, classless objects and `[[Prototype]]` delegation (see the *this & Object Prototypes* title of this series).

#### Subclass Constructor

Constructors are not required for classes or subclasses; a default constructor is substituted in both cases if omitted. However, the default substituted constructor is different for a direct class versus an extended class.

Specifically, the default subclass constructor automatically calls the parent constructor, and passes along any arguments. In other words, you could think of the default subclass constructor sort of like this:

```js
constructor(...args) {
	super(...args);
}
```

This is an important detail to note. Not all class languages have the subclass constructor automatically call the parent constructor. C++ does, but Java does not. But more importantly, in pre-ES6 classes, such automatic "parent constructor" calling does not happen. Be careful when converting to ES6 `class` if you've been relying on such calls *not* happening.

Another perhaps surprising deviation/limitation of ES6 subclass constructors: in a constructor of a subclass, you cannot access `this` until `super(..)` has been called. The reason is nuanced and complicated, but it boils down to the fact that the parent constructor is actually the one creating/initializing your instance's `this`. Pre-ES6, it works oppositely; the `this` object is created by the "subclass constructor," and then you  call a "parent constructor" with the context of the "subclass" `this`.

Let's illustrate. This works pre-ES6:

```js
function Foo() {
	this.a = 1;
}

function Bar() {
	this.b = 2;
	Foo.call( this );
}

// `Bar` "extends" `Foo`
Bar.prototype = Object.create( Foo.prototype );
```

But this ES6 equivalent is not allowed:

```js
class Foo {
	constructor() { this.a = 1; }
}

class Bar extends Foo {
	constructor() {
		this.b = 2;			// not allowed before `super()`
		super();			// to fix swap these two statements
	}
}
```

In this case, the fix is simple. Just swap the two statements in the subclass `Bar` constructor. However, if you've been relying pre-ES6 on being able to skip calling the "parent constructor," beware because that won't be allowed anymore.

#### `extend`ing Natives

One of the most heralded benefits to the new `class` and `extend` design is the ability to (finally!) subclass the built-in natives, like `Array`. Consider:

```js
class MyCoolArray extends Array {
	first() { return this[0]; }
	last() { return this[this.length - 1]; }
}

var a = new MyCoolArray( 1, 2, 3 );

a.length;					// 3
a;							// [1,2,3]

a.first();					// 1
a.last();					// 3
```

Prior to ES6, a fake "subclass" of `Array` using manual object creation and linking to `Array.prototype` only partially worked. It missed out on the special behaviors of a real array, such as the automatically updating `length` property. ES6 subclasses should fully work with "inherited" and augmented behaviors as expected!

Another common pre-ES6 "subclass" limitation is with the `Error` object, in creating custom error "subclasses." When genuine `Error` objects are created, they automatically capture special `stack` information, including the line number and file where the error is created. Pre-ES6 custom error "subclasses" have no such special behavior, which severely limits their usefulness.

ES6 to the rescue:

```js
class Oops extends Error {
	constructor(reason) {
		super(reason);
		this.oops = reason;
	}
}

// later:
var ouch = new Oops( "I messed up!" );
throw ouch;
```

The `ouch` custom error object in this previous snippet will behave like any other genuine error object, including capturing `stack`. That's a big improvement!

### `new.target`

ES6 introduces a new concept called a *meta property* (see Chapter 7), in the form of `new.target`.

If that looks strange, it is; pairing a keyword with a `.` and a property name is definitely an out-of-the-ordinary pattern for JS.

`new.target` is a new "magical" value available in all functions, though in normal functions it will always be `undefined`. In any constructor, `new.target` always points at the constructor that `new` actually directly invoked, even if the constructor is in a parent class and was delegated to by a `super(..)` call from a child constructor. Consider:

```js
class Foo {
	constructor() {
		console.log( "Foo: ", new.target.name );
	}
}

class Bar extends Foo {
	constructor() {
		super();
		console.log( "Bar: ", new.target.name );
	}
	baz() {
		console.log( "baz: ", new.target );
	}
}

var a = new Foo();
// Foo: Foo

var b = new Bar();
// Foo: Bar   <-- respects the `new` call-site
// Bar: Bar

b.baz();
// baz: undefined
```

The `new.target` meta property doesn't have much purpose in class constructors, except accessing a static property/method (see the next section).

If `new.target` is `undefined`, you know the function was not called with `new`. You can then force a `new` invocation if that's necessary.

### `static`

When a subclass `Bar` extends a parent class `Foo`, we already observed that `Bar.prototype` is `[[Prototype]]`-linked to `Foo.prototype`. But additionally, `Bar()` is `[[Prototype]]`-linked to `Foo()`. That part may not have such an obvious reasoning.

However, it's quite useful in the case where you declare `static` methods (not just properties) for a class, as these are added directly to that class's function object, not to the function object's `prototype` object. Consider:

```js
class Foo {
	static cool() { console.log( "cool" ); }
	wow() { console.log( "wow" ); }
}

class Bar extends Foo {
	static awesome() {
		super.cool();
		console.log( "awesome" );
	}
	neat() {
		super.wow();
		console.log( "neat" );
	}
}

Foo.cool();					// "cool"
Bar.cool();					// "cool"
Bar.awesome();				// "cool"
							// "awesome"

var b = new Bar();
b.neat();					// "wow"
							// "neat"

b.awesome;					// undefined
b.cool;						// undefined
```

Be careful not to get confused that `static` members are on the class's prototype chain. They're actually on the dual/parallel chain between the function constructors.

#### `Symbol.species` Constructor Getter

One place where `static` can be useful is in setting the `Symbol.species` getter (known internally in the specification as `@@species`) for a derived (child) class. This capability allows a child class to signal to a parent class what constructor should be used -- when not intending the child class's constructor itself -- if any parent class method needs to vend a new instance.

For example, many methods on `Array` create and return a new `Array` instance. If you define a derived class from `Array`, but you want those methods to continue to vend actual `Array` instances instead of from your derived class, this works:

```js
class MyCoolArray extends Array {
	// force `species` to be parent constructor
	static get [Symbol.species]() { return Array; }
}

var a = new MyCoolArray( 1, 2, 3 ),
	b = a.map( function(v){ return v * 2; } );

b instanceof MyCoolArray;	// false
b instanceof Array;			// true
```

To illustrate how a parent class method can use a child's species declaration somewhat like `Array#map(..)` is doing, consider:

```js
class Foo {
	// defer `species` to derived constructor
	static get [Symbol.species]() { return this; }
	spawn() {
		return new this.constructor[Symbol.species]();
	}
}

class Bar extends Foo {
	// force `species` to be parent constructor
	static get [Symbol.species]() { return Foo; }
}

var a = new Foo();
var b = a.spawn();
b instanceof Foo;					// true

var x = new Bar();
var y = x.spawn();
y instanceof Bar;					// false
y instanceof Foo;					// true
```

The parent class `Symbol.species` does `return this` to defer to any derived class, as you'd normally expect. `Bar` then overrides to manually declare `Foo` to be used for such instance creation. Of course, a derived class can still vend instances of itself using `new this.constructor(..)`.

## Review

ES6 introduces several new features that aid in code organization:

* Iterators provide sequential access to data or operations. They can be consumed by new language features like `for..of` and `...`.
* Generators are locally pause/resume capable functions controlled by an iterator. They can be used to programmatically (and interactively, through `yield`/`next(..)` message passing) *generate* values to be consumed via iteration.
* Modules allow private encapsulation of implementation details with a publicly exported API. Module definitions are file-based, singleton instances, and statically resolved at compile time.
* Classes provide cleaner syntax around prototype-based coding. The addition of `super` also solves tricky issues with relative references in the `[[Prototype]]` chain.

These new tools should be your first stop when trying to improve the architecture of your JS projects by embracing ES6.
